All's Well That Ends Well

    Enter BERTRAM, the COUNTESS of Rousillon, HELENA, and LAFEU, all in
    black 

    In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.

    And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death
    anew: but I must attend his majesty's command, to
    whom I am now in ward, evermore in subjection.

    You shall find of the king a husband, madam; you,
    sir, a father: he that so generally is at all times
    good must of necessity hold his virtue to you; whose
    worthiness would stir it up where it wanted rather
    than lack it where there is such abundance.

    What hope is there of his majesty's amendment?

    He hath abandoned his physicians, madam; under whose
    practises he hath persecuted time with hope, and
    finds no other advantage in the process but only the
    losing of hope by time.

    This young gentlewoman had a father, -- O, that
    'had'! how sad a passage 'tis! -- whose skill was
    almost as great as his honesty; had it stretched so
    far, would have made nature immortal, and death
    should have play for lack of work. Would, for the
    king's sake, he were living! I think it would be
    the death of the king's disease.

    How called you the man you speak of, madam?

    He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was
    his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.

    He was excellent indeed, madam: the king very
    lately spoke of him admiringly and mourningly: he
    was skilful enough to have lived still, if knowledge
    could be set up against mortality.

    What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?

    A fistula, my lord.

    I heard not of it before.

    I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman
    the daughter of Gerard de Narbon?

    His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
    overlooking. I have those hopes of her good that
    her education promises; her dispositions she
    inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where
    an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there
    commendations go with pity; they are virtues and
    traitors too; in her they are the better for their
    simpleness; she derives her honesty and achieves her goodness.

    Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.

    'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise
    in. The remembrance of her father never approaches
    her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows takes all
    livelihood from her cheek. No more of this, Helena;
    go to, no more; lest it be rather thought you affect
    a sorrow than have it.

    I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.

    Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,
    excessive grief the enemy to the living.

    If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess
    makes it soon mortal.

    Madam, I desire your holy wishes.

    How understand we that?

    Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
    In manners, as in shape! thy blood and virtue
    Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
    Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,
    Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
    Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
    Under thy own life's key: be cheque'd for silence,
    But never tax'd for speech. What heaven more will,
    That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
    Fall on thy head! Farewell, my lord;
    'Tis an unseason'd courtier; good my lord,
    Advise him.

    He cannot want the best
    That shall attend his love.

    Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.

    Exit

    The best wishes that can be forged in
    your thoughts be servants to you! Be comfortable
    to my mother, your mistress, and make much of her.

    Farewell, pretty lady: you must hold the credit of
    your father.

    Exeunt BERTRAM and LAFEU

    O, were that all! I think not on my father;
    And these great tears grace his remembrance more
    Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
    I have forgot him: my imagination
    Carries no f bleak i' the cold wind: withal, full oft we see
    Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.

    Save you, fair queen!

    And you, monarch!

    No.

    And no.

    Are you meditating on virginity?

    Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you: let me
    ask you a question. Man is enemy to virginity; how
    may we barricado it against him?

    Keep him out.

    But he assails; and our virginity, though valiant,
    in the defence yet is weak: unfold to us some
    warlike resistance.

    There is none: man, sitting down before you, will
    undermine you and blow you up.

    Bless our poor virginity from underminers and
    blowers up! Is there no military policy, how
    virgins might blow up men?

    Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be
    blown up: marry, in blowing him down again, with
    the breach yourselves made, you lose your city. It
    is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to
    preserve virginity. Loss of virginity is rational
    increavour in't but Bertram's.
    I am undone: there is no living, none,
    If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one
    That I should love a bright particular star
    And think to wed it, he is so above me:
    In his bright radiance and collateral light
    Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
    The ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
    The hind that would be mated by the lion
    Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though plague,
    To see him every hour; to sit and draw
    His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
    In our heart's table; heart too capable
    Of every line and trick of his sweet favour:
    But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
    Must sanctify his reliques. Who comes here?

    Enter PAROLLES

    Aside

    One that goes with him: I love him for his sake;
    And yet I know him a notorious liar,
    Think him a great way fool, solely a coward;
    Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him,
    That they take place, when virtue's steely bones
    Lookase and there was never virgin got till
    virginity was first lost. That you were made of is
    metal to make virgins. Virginity by being once lost
    may be ten times found; by being ever kept, it is
    ever lost: 'tis too cold a companion; away with 't!

    I will stand for 't a little, though therefore I die a virgin.

    There's little can be said in 't; 'tis against the
    rule of nature. To speak on the part of virginity,
    is to accuse your mothers; which is most infallible
    disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin:
    virginity murders itself and should be buried in
    highways out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate
    offendress against nature. Virginity breeds mites,
    much like a cheese; consumes itself to the very
    paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach.
    Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of
    self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
    canon. Keep it not; you cannot choose but loose
    by't: out with 't! within ten year it will make
    itself ten, which is a goodly increase; and the
    principal itself not much the worse: away with 't!

    How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?

    Let me see: marry, ill, to like him that ne'er it
    likes. 'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with
    lying; the longer kept, the less worth: off with 't
    while 'tis vendible; answer the time of request.
    Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out
    of fashion: richly suited, but unsuitable: just
    like the brooch and the tooth-pick, which wear not
    now. Your date is better in your pie and your
    porridge than in your cheek; and your virginity,
    your old virginity, is like one of our French
    withered pears, it looks ill, it eats drily; marry,
    'tis a withered pear; it was formerly better;
    marry, yet 'tis a withered pear: will you anything with it?

    Not my virginity yet
    There shall your master have a thousand loves,
    A mother and a miss, you were born under a charitable star.

    Under Mars, I.

    I especially think, under Mars.

    Why under Mars?

    The wars have so kept you under that you must needs
    be born under Mars.

    When he was predominant.

    When he was retrograde, I think, rather.

    Why think you so?

    You go so much backward when you fight.

    That's for advantage.

    So is running away, when fear proposes the safety;
    but the composition that your valour and fear makes
    in you is a virtue of a good wing, and I like the wear well.

    I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee
    acutely. I will return perfect courtier; in the
    which, my instruction shall serve to naturalize
    thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's
    counsel and understand what advice shall thrust upon
    thee; else thou diest in thine unthankfulness, and
    thine ignorance makes thee away: farewell. When
    thou hast leisure, say thy prayers; when thou hast
    none, remember thy friends; get thee a good husband,
    and use him as he uses thee; so, farewell.

    Exit

    Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
    Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
    Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
    Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
    What power is it which mounts my love so high,
    That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
    The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
    To join like likes and kiss like native things.
    Impossible be strange attempts to those
    That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose
    What hath been cannot be: who ever strove
    So show her merit, that did miss her love?
    The king's disease -- my project may deceive me,
    But my intents are fix'd and will not leave me.

    Exit

    Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING of France, with letters, and
    divers Attendants 

    The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears;
    Have fought with equal fortune and continue
    A braving war.

    So 't   My thanks and duty are your majesty's.

    I would I had that corporal soundness now,
    As when thy father and myself in friendship
    First tried our soldiership! He did look far
    Into the service of the time and was
    Discipled of the bravest: he lasted long;
    But on us both did haggish age steal on
    And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
    To talk of your good father. In his youth
    He had the wit which I can well observe
    To-day in our young lords; but they may jest
    Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
    Ere they can hide their levity in honour;
    So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
    Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
    His equal had awaked them, and his honour,
    Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
    Exception bid him speak, and at this time
    His tongue obey'd his hand: who were below him
    He used as creatures of another place
    And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks,
    Making them proud of his humility,
    In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
    Might be a copy to these younger times;
    Which, follow'd well, would demonstrate them now
    But goers backward.

    His good remembrance, sir,
    Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb;
    So in approof lives not his epitaph
    As in your royal speech.

    Would I were with him! He would always say --
    Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words
    He scatter'd not in ears, but grafted them,
    To grow there and to bear, -- 'Let me not live,' --
    This his good melancholy oft began,
    On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
    When it was out, -- 'Let me not live,' quoth he,
    'After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
    Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
    All but new things disdain; whose judgments are
    Mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
    Expire before their fashions.' This he wish'd;
    I after him do after him wish too,
    Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
    I quickly were dissolved from my hive,
    To give some labourers room.

    You are loved, sir:
    They that least lend it you shall lack you first.

    I fill a place, I know't. How long is't, count,
    Since the physician at your father's died?
    He was much famed.

    Some six months since, my lord.

    If he were living, I would try him yet.
    Lend me an arm; the rest have worn me out
    With several applications; nature and sickness
    Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count;
    My son's no dearer.

    Thank your majesty.

    Exeunt. Flourish

    Enter COUNTESS, Steward, and Clown 

    I will now hear; what say you of this gentlewoman?

    Madam, the care I have had to even your content, I
    wish might be found in the calendar of my past
    endeavours; for then we wound our modesty and make
    foul the clearness of our deservings, when of
    ourselves we publish them.

    What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah:
    the complaints I have heard of you I do not all
    believe: 'tis my slowness that I do not; for I know
    you lack not folly to commit them, and have ability
    enough to make such knaveries yours.

    'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.

    Well, sir.

    No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor, though
    many of the rich are damned: but, if I may have
    your ladyship's good will to go to the world, Isbel
    the woman and I will do as we may.

    Wilt thou needs be a beggar?

    I do beg your good will in this case.

    In what case?

    In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no
    heritage: and I think I shall never have the
    blessing of God till I have issue o' my body; for
    they say barnes are blessings.

    Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.

    My poor body, madam, requires it: I am driven on
    by the flesh; and he must needs go that the devil drives.

    Is this all your worship's reason?

    Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons such as they
    are.

    May the world know them?

    I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and
    all flesh and blood are; and, indeed, I do marry
    that I may repent.

    Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.

    I am out o' friends, madam; and I hope to have
    friends for my wife's sake.

    Such friends are thine enemies, knave.

    You're shallow, madam, in great friends; for the
    knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary of.
    He that ears my land spares my team and gives me
    leave to in the crop; if I be his cuckold, he's my
    drudge: he that comforts my wife is the cherisher
    of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh
    and blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my
    flesh and blood is my friend: ergo, he that kisses
    my wife is my friend. If men could be contented to
    be what they are, there were no fear in marriage;
    for young Charbon the Puritan and old Poysam the
    Papist, howsome'er their hearts are severed in
    religion, their heads are both one; they may jowl
    horns together, like any deer i' the herd.

    Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and calumnious knave?

    A prophet I, madam; and I speak the truth the next
    way:
    For I the ballad will repeat,
    Which men full true shall find;
    Your marriage comes by destiny,
    Your cuckoo sings by kind.

    Get you gone, sir; I'll talk with you more anon.

    May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come to
    you: of her I am to speak.

    Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her;
    Helen, I mean.

    Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
    Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
    Fond done, done fond,
    Was this King Priam's joy?
    With that she sighed as she stood,
    With that she sighed as she stood,
    And gave this sentence then;
    Among nine bad if one be good,
    Among nine bad if one be good,
    There's yet one good in ten.

    What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.

    One good woman in ten, madam; which is a purifying
    o' the song: would God would serve the world so all
    the year! we'ld find no fault with the tithe-woman,
    if I were the parson. One in ten, quoth a'! An we
    might have a good woman born but one every blazing
    star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery
    well: a man may draw his heart out, ere a' pluck
    one.

    You'll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command you.

    That man should be at woman's command, and yet no
    hurt done! Though honesty be no puritan, yet it
    will do no hurt; it will wear the surplice of
    humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am
    going, forsooth: the business is for Helen to come hither.

    Exit

    Well, now.

    I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.

    Faith, I do: her father bequeathed her to me; and
    she herself, without other advantage, may lawfully
    make title to as much love as she finds: there is
    more owing her than is paid; and more shall be paid
    her than she'll demand.

    Madam, I was very late more near her than I think
    she wished me: alone she was, and did communicate
    to herself her own words to her own ears; she
    thought, I dare vow for her, they touched not any
    stranger sense. Her matter was, she loved your son:
    Fortune, she said, was no goddess, that had put
    such difference betwixt their two estates; Love no
    god, that would not extend his might, only where
    qualities were level; Dian no queen of virgins, that
    would suffer her poor knight surprised, without
    rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward.
    This she delivered in the most bitter touch of
    sorrow that e'er I heard virgin exclaim in: which I
    held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal;
    sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns
    you something to know it.

    You have discharged this honestly; keep it to
    yourself: many likelihoods informed me of this
    before, which hung so tottering in the balance that
    I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you,
    leave me: stall this in your bosom; and I thank you
    for your honest care: I will speak with you further anon.

    Exit Steward

    Enter HELENA

    Even so it was with me when I was young:
    If ever we are nature's, these are ours; this thorn
    Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
    Our blood to us, this to our blood is born;
    It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
    Where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth:
    By our remembrances of days foregone,
    Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
    Her eye is sick on't: I observe her now.

    What is your pleasure, madam?

    You know, Helen,
    I am a mother to you.

    Mine honourable mistress.

    Nay, a mother:
    Why not a mother? When I said 'a mother,'
    Methought you saw a serpent: what's in 'mother,'
    That you start at it? I say, I am your mother;
    And put you in the catalogue of those
    That were enwombed mine: 'tis often seen
    Adoption strives with nature and choice breeds
    A native slip to us from foreign seeds:
    You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
    Yet I express to you a mother's care:
    God's mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
    To say I am thy mother? What's the matter,
    That this distemper'd messenger of wet,
    The many-colour'd Iris, rounds thine eye?
    Why? that you are my daughter?

    That I am not.

    I say, I am your mother.

    Pardon, madam;
    The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother:
    I am from humble, he from honour'd name;
    No note upon my parents, his all noble:
    My master, my dear lord he is; and I
    His servant live, and will his vassal die:
    He must not be my brother.

    Nor I your mother?

    You are my mother, madam; would you were, --
    So that my lord your son were not my brother, --
    Indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
    I care no more for than I do for heaven,
    So I were not his sister. Can't no other,
    But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?

    Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law:
    God shield you mean it not! daughter and mother
    So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
    My fear hath catch'd your fondness: now I see
    The mystery of your loneliness, and find
    Your salt tears' head: now to all sense 'tis gross
    You love my son; invention is ashamed,
    Against the proclamation of thy passion,
    To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true;
    But tell me then, 'tis so; for, look thy cheeks
    Confess it, th' one to th' other; and thine eyes
    See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
    That in their kind they speak it: only sin
    And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
    That truth should be suspected. Speak, is't so?
    If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
    If it be not, forswear't: howe'er, I charge thee,
    As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
    Tell me truly.

    Good madam, pardon me!

    Do you love my son?

    Your pardon, noble mistress!

    Love you my son?

    Do not you love him, madam?

    Go not about; my love hath in't a bond,
    Whereof the world takes note: come, come, disclose
    The state of your affection; for your passions
    Have to the full appeach'd.

    Then, I confess,
    Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
    That before you, and next unto high heaven,
    I love your son.
    My friends were poor, but honest; so's my love:
    Be not offended; for it hurts not him
    That he is loved of me: I follow him not
    By any token of presumptuous suit;
    Nor would I have him till I do deserve him;
    Yet never know how that desert should be.
    I know I love in vain, strive against hope;
    Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
    I still pour in the waters of my love
    And lack not to lose still: thus, Indian-like,
    Religious in mine error, I adore
    The sun, that looks upon his worshipper,
    But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
    Let not your hate encounter with my love
    For loving where you do: but if yourself,
    Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
    Did ever in so true a flame of liking
    Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
    Was both herself and love: O, then, give pity
    To her, whose state is such that cannot choose
    But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
    That seeks not to find that her search implies,
    But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies!

    Had you not lately an intent, -- speak truly, --
    To go to Paris?

    Madam, I had.

    Wherefore? tell true.

    I will tell truth; by grace itself I swear.
    You know my father left me some prescriptions
    Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
    And manifest experience had collected
    For general sovereignty; and that he will'd me
    In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
    As notes whose faculties inclusive were
    More than they were in note: amongst the rest,
    There is a remedy, approved, set down,
    To cure the desperate languishings whereof
    The king is render'd lost.

    This was your motive
    For Paris, was it? speak.

    My lord your son made me to think of this;
    Else Paris and the medicine and the king
    Had from the conversation of my thoughts
    Haply been absent then.

    But think you, Helen,
    If you should tender your supposed aid,
    He would receive it? he and his physicians
    Are of a mind; he, that they cannot help him,
    They, that they cannot help: how shall they credit
    A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
    Embowell'd of their doctrine, have left off
    The danger to itself?

    There's something in't,
    More than my father's skill, which was the greatest
    Of his profession, that his good receipt
    Shall for my legacy be sanctified
    By the luckiest stars in heaven: and, would your honour
    But give me leave to try success, I'ld venture
    The well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure
    By such a day and hour.

    Dost thou believe't?

    Ay, madam, knowingly.

    Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
    Means and attendants and my loving greetings
    To those of mine in court: I'll stay at home
    And pray God's blessing into thy attempt:
    Be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this,
    What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.

    Exeunt

    Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING, attended with divers young
    Lords taking leave for the Florentine war; BERTRAM, and PAROLLES 

    Farewell, young lords; these warlike principles
    Do not throw from you: and you, my lords, farewell:
    Share the advice betwixt you; if both gain, all
    The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received,
    And is enough for both.

    'Tis our hope, sir,
    After well enter'd soldiers, to return
    And find your grace in health.

    No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
    Will not confess he owes the malady
    That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords;
    Whether I live or die, be you the sons
    Of worthy Frenchmen: let higher Italy, --
    Those bated that inherit but the fall
    Of the last monarchy, -- see that you come
    Not to woo honour, but to wed it; when
    The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
    That fame may cry you loud: I say, farewell.

    Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!

    Those girls of Italy, take heed of them:
    They say, our French lack language to deny,
    If they demand: beware of being captives,
    Before you serve.

    Our hearts receive your warnings.

    Farewell. Come hither to me.

    Exit, attended

    O, my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!

    'Tis not his fault, the spark.

    O, 'tis brave wars!

    Most admirable: I have seen those wars.

    I am commanded here, and kept a coil with
    'Too young' and 'the next year' and ''tis too early.'

    An thy mind stand to't, boy, steal away bravely.

    I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
    Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
    Till honour be bought up and no sword worn
    But one to dance with! By heaven, I'll steal away.

    There's honour in the theft.

    Commit it, count.

    I am your accessary; and so, farewell.

    I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.

    Farewell, captain.

    Sweet Monsieur Parolles!

    Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good
    sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall
    find in the regiment of the Spinii one Captain
    Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war, here
    on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword
    entrenched it: say to him, I live; and observe his
    reports for me.

    We shall, noble captain.

    Exeunt Lords

    Mars dote on you for his novices! what will ye do?

    Stay: the king.

    Re-enter KING. BERTRAM and PAROLLES retire

    Use a more spacious ceremony to the
    noble lords; you have restrained yourself within the
    list of too cold an adieu: be more expressive to
    them: for they wear themselves in the cap of the
    time, there do muster true gait, eat, speak, and
    move under the influence of the most received star;
    and though the devil lead the measure, such are to
    be followed: after them, and take a more dilated farewell.

    And I will do so.

    Worthy fellows; and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.

    Exeunt BERTRAM and PAROLLES

    Enter LAFEU

    Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.

    I'll fee thee to stand up.

    Then here's a man stands, that has brought his pardon.
    I would you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy,
    And that at my bidding you could so stand up.

    I would I had; so I had broke thy pate,
    And ask'd thee mercy for't.

    Good faith, across: but, my good lord 'tis thus;
    Will you be cured of your infirmity?

    No.

    O, will you eat no grapes, my royal fox?
    Yes, but you will my noble grapes, an if
    My royal fox could reach them: I have seen a medicine
    That's able to breathe life into a stone,
    Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
    With spritely fire and motion; whose simple touch,
    Is powerful to araise King Pepin, nay,
    To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand,
    And write to her a love-line.

    What 'her' is this?

    Why, Doctor She: my lord, there's one arrived,
    If you will see her: now, by my faith and honour,
    If seriously I may convey my thoughts
    In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
    With one that, in her sex, her years, profession,
    Wisdom and constancy, hath amazed me more
    Than I dare blame my weakness: will you see her
    For that is her demand, and know her business?
    That done, laugh well at me.

    Now, good Lafeu,
    Bring in the admiration; that we with thee
    May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
    By wondering how thou took'st it.

    Nay, I'll fit you,
    And not be all day neither.

    Exit

    Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.

    Re-enter LAFEU, with HELENA

    Nay, come your ways.

    This haste hath wings indeed.

    Nay, come your ways:
    This is his majesty; say your mind to him:
    A traitor you do look like; but such traitors
    His majesty seldom fears: I am Cressid's uncle,
    That dare leave two together; fare you well.

    Exit

    Now, fair one, does your business follow us?

    Ay, my good lord.
    Gerard de Narbon was my father;
    In what he did profess, well found.

    I knew him.

    The rather will I spare my praises towards him:
    Knowing him is enough. On's bed of death
    Many receipts he gave me: chiefly one.
    Which, as the dearest issue of his practise,
    And of his old experience the oily darling,
    He bade me store up, as a triple eye,
    Safer than mine own two, more dear; I have so;
    And hearing your high majesty is touch'd
    With that malignant cause wherein the honour
    Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
    I come to tender it and my appliance
    With all bound humbleness.

    We thank you, maiden;
    But may not be so credulous of cure,
    When our most learned doctors leave us and
    The congregated college have concluded
    That labouring art can never ransom nature
    From her inaidible estate; I say we must not
    So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
    To prostitute our past-cure malady
    To empirics, or to dissever so
    Our great self and our credit, to esteem
    A senseless help when help past sense we deem.

    My duty then shall pay me for my pains:
    I will no more enforce mine office on you.
    Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
    A modest one, to bear me back again.

    I cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful:
    Thou thought'st to help me; and such thanks I give
    As one near death to those that wish him live:
    But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
    I knowing all my peril, thou no art.

    What I can do can do no hurt to try,
    Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.
    He that of greatest works is finisher
    Oft does them by the weakest minister:
    So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown,
    When judges have been babes; great floods have flown
    From simple sources, and great seas have dried
    When miracles have by the greatest been denied.
    Oft expectation fails and most oft there
    Where most it promises, and oft it hits
    Where hope is coldest and despair most fits.

    I must not hear thee; fare thee well, kind maid;
    Thy pains not used must by thyself be paid:
    Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.

    Inspired merit so by breath is barr'd:
    It is not so with Him that all things knows
    As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
    But most it is presumption in us when
    The help of heaven we count the act of men.
    Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent;
    Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
    I am not an impostor that proclaim
    Myself against the level of mine aim;
    But know I think and think I know most sure
    My art is not past power nor you past cure.

    Are thou so confident? within what space
    Hopest thou my cure?

    The great'st grace lending grace
    Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
    Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
    Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
    Moist Hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy lamp,
    Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
    Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass,
    What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
    Health shall live free and sickness freely die.

    Upon thy certainty and confidence
    What darest thou venture?

    Tax of impudence,
    A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame
    Traduced by odious ballads: my maiden's name
    Sear'd otherwise; nay, worse -- if worse -- extended
    With vilest torture let my life be ended.

    Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
    His powerful sound within an organ weak:
    And what impossibility would slay
    In common sense, sense saves another way.
    Thy life is dear; for all that life can rate
    Worth name of life in thee hath estimate,
    Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
    That happiness and prime can happy call:
    Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
    Skill infinite or monstrous desperate.
    Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try,
    That ministers thine own death if I die.

    If I break time, or flinch in property
    Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
    And well deserved: not helping, death's my fee;
    But, if I help, what do you promise me?

    Make thy demand.

    But will you make it even?

    Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.

    Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
    What husband in thy power I will command:
    Exempted be from me the arrogance
    To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
    My low and humble name to propagate
    With any branch or image of thy state;
    But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
    Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.

    Here is my hand; the premises observed,
    Thy will by my performance shall be served:
    So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
    Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
    More should I question thee, and more I must,
    Though more to know could not be more to trust,
    From whence thou camest, how tended on: but rest
    Unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest.
    Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed
    As high as word, my deed shall match thy meed.

    Flourish. Exeunt

    Enter COUNTESS and Clown 

    Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the height of
    your breeding.

    I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught: I
    know my business is but to the court.

    To the court! why, what place make you special,
    when you put off that with such contempt? But to the court!

    Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he
    may easily put it off at court: he that cannot make
    a leg, put off's cap, kiss his hand and say nothing,
    has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap; and indeed
    such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the
    court; but for me, I have an answer will serve all
    men.

    Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
    questions.

    It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks,
    the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawn
    buttock, or any buttock.

    Will your answer serve fit to all questions?

    As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney,
    as your French crown for your taffeta punk, as Tib's
    rush for Tom's forefinger, as a pancake for Shrove
    Tuesday, a morris for May-day, as the nail to his
    hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding queen
    to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the
    friar's mouth, nay, as the pudding to his skin.

    Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all
    questions?

    From below your duke to beneath your constable, it
    will fit any question.

    It must be an answer of most monstrous size that
    must fit all demands.

    But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
    should speak truth of it: here it is, and all that
    belongs to't. Ask me if I am a courtier: it shall
    do you no harm to learn.

    To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool in
    question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. I
    pray you, sir, are you a courtier?

    O Lord, sir! There's a simple putting off. More,
    more, a hundred of them.

    Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.

    O Lord, sir! Thick, thick, spare not me.

    I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.

    O Lord, sir! Nay, put me to't, I warrant you.

    You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.

    O Lord, sir! spare not me.

    Do you cry, 'O Lord, sir!' at your whipping, and
    'spare not me?' Indeed your 'O Lord, sir!' is very
    sequent to your whipping: you would answer very well
    to a whipping, if you were but bound to't.

    I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'O Lord,
    sir!' I see things may serve long, but not serve ever.

    I play the noble housewife with the time
    To entertain't so merrily with a fool.

    O Lord, sir! why, there't serves well again.

    An end, sir; to your business. Give Helen this,
    And urge her to a present answer back:
    Commend me to my kinsmen and my son:
    This is not much.

    Not much commendation to them.

    Not much employment for you: you understand me?

    Most fruitfully: I am there before my legs.

    Haste you again.

    Exeunt severally

    Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES 

    They say miracles are past; and we have our
    philosophical persons, to make modern and familiar,
    things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it that
    we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves
    into seeming knowledge, when we should submit
    ourselves to an unknown fear.

    Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath
    shot out in our latter times.

    And so 'tis.

    To be relinquish'd of the artists, --

    So I say.

    Both of Galen and Paracelsus.

    So I say.

    Of all the learned and authentic fellows, --

    Right; so I say.

    That gave him out incurable, --

    Why, there 'tis; so say I too.

    Not to be helped, --

    Right; as 'twere, a man assured of a --

    Uncertain life, and sure death.

    Just, you say well; so would I have said.

    I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.

    It is, indeed: if you will have it in showing, you
    shall read it in -- what do you call there?

    A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.

    That's it; I would have said the very same.

    Why, your dolphin is not lustier: 'fore me,
    I speak in respect --

    Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange, that is the
    brief and the tedious of it; and he's of a most
    facinerious spirit that will not acknowledge it to be the --

    Very hand of heaven.

    Ay, so I say.

    In a most weak --

    pausing

    and debile minister, great power, great
    transcendence: which should, indeed, give us a
    further use to be made than alone the recovery of
    the king, as to be --

    pausing

    generally thankful.

    I would have said it; you say well. Here comes the king.

    Enter KING, HELENA, and Attendants. LAFEU and PAROLLES retire

    Lustig, as the Dutchman says: I'll like a maid the
    better, whilst I have a tooth in my head: why, he's
    able to lead her a coranto.

    Mort du vinaigre! is not this Helen?

    'Fore God, I think so.

    Go, call before me all the lords in court.
    Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side;
    And with this healthful hand, whose banish'd sense
    Thou hast repeal'd, a second time receive
    The confirmation of my promised gift,
    Which but attends thy naming.

    Enter three or four Lords

    Fair maid, send forth thine eye: this youthful parcel
    Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
    O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
    I have to use: thy frank election make;
    Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.

    To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
    Fall, when Love please! marry, to each, but one!

    I'ld give bay Curtal and his furniture,
    My mouth no more were broken than these boys',
    And writ as little beard.

    Peruse them well:
    Not one of those but had a noble father.

    Gentlemen,
    Heaven hath through me restored the king to health.

    We understand it, and thank heaven for you.

    I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest,
    That I protest I simply am a maid.
    Please it your majesty, I have done already:
    The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me,
    'We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be refused,
    Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever;
    We'll ne'er come there again.'

    Make choice; and, see,
    Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.

    Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
    And to imperial Love, that god most high,
    Do my sighs stream. Sir, will you hear my suit?

    And grant it.

    Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.

    I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace
    for my life.

    The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
    Before I speak, too threateningly replies:
    Love make your fortunes twenty times above
    Her that so wishes and her humble love!

    No better, if you please.

    My wish receive,
    Which great Love grant! and so, I take my leave.

    Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine,
    I'd have them whipped; or I would send them to the
    Turk, to make eunuchs of.

    Be not afraid that I your hand should take;
    I'll never do you wrong for your own sake:
    Blessing upon your vows! and in your bed
    Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!

    These boys are boys of ice, they'll none have her:
    sure, they are bastards to the English; the French
    ne'er got 'em.

    You are too young, too happy, and too good,
    To make yourself a son out of my blood.

    Fair one, I think not so.

    There's one grape yet; I am sure thy father drunk
    wine: but if thou be'st not an ass, I am a youth
    of fourteen; I have known thee already.

    I dare not say I take you; but I give
    Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
    Into your guiding power. This is the man.

    Why, then, young Bertram, take her; she's thy wife.

    My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your highness,
    In such a business give me leave to use
    The help of mine own eyes.

    Know'st thou not, Bertram,
    What she has done for me?

    Yes, my good lord;
    But never hope to know why I should marry her.

    Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.

    But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
    Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
    She had her breeding at my father's charge.
    A poor physician's daughter my wife! Disdain
    Rather corrupt me ever!

    'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
    I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
    Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together,
    Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off
    In differences so mighty. If she be
    All that is virtuous, save what thou dislikest,
    A poor physician's daughter, thou dislikest
    Of virtue for the name: but do not so:
    From lowest place when virtuous things proceed,
    The place is dignified by the doer's deed:
    Where great additions swell's, and virtue none,
    It is a dropsied honour. Good alone
    Is good without a name. Vileness is so:
    The property by what it is should go,
    Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
    In these to nature she's immediate heir,
    And these breed honour: that is honour's scorn,
    Which challenges itself as honour's born
    And is ns distrait as his companion.

"Yes, yes, brandy!" he cried. "The man is at his last gasp. It was all I
could do to bring him here. He fainted twice upon the way."

Half a tumbler of the raw spirit brought about a wondrous change. He
pushed himself up on one arm and swung his coat from his shoulders. "For
God's sake, oil, opium, morphia!" he cried. "Anything to ease this
infernal agony!"

The inspector and I cried out at the sight. There, crisscrossed upon the
man's naked shoulder, was the same strange reticulated pattern of red,
inflamed lines which had been the death-mark of Fitzroy McPherson.

The pain was evidently terrible and was more than local, for the
sufferer's breathing would stop for a time, his face would turn black,
and then with loud gasps he would clap his hand to his heart, while his
brow dropped beads of sweat. At any moment he might die. More and more
brandy was poured down his throat, each fresh dose bringing him back to
life. Pads of cotton-wool soaked in salad-oil seemed to take the agony
from the strange wounds. At last his head fell heavily upon the cushion.
Exhausted Nature had taken refuge in its last storehouse of vitality. It
was half a sleep and half a faint, but at least it was ease from pain.

To question him had been impossible, but the moment we were assured of
his condition Stackhurst turned upon me.

"My God!" he cried, "what is it, Holmes? What is it?"

"Where did you find him?"

"Down on the beach. Exactly where poor McPherson met his end. If this
man's heart had been weak as McPherson's was, he would not be here now.
More than once I thought he was gone as I brought him up. It was too far
to The Gables, so I made for you."

"Did you see him on the beach?"

"I was walking on the cliff when I heard his cry. He was at the edge of
the water, reeling about like a drunken man. I ran down, threw some
clothes about him, and brought him up. For heaven's sake, Holmes, use
all the powers you have and spare no pains to lift the curse from this
place, for life is becoming unendurable. Can you, with all your
world-wide reputation, do nothing for us?"

"I think I can, Stackhurst. Come with me now! And you, Inspector, come
along! We will see if we cannot deliver this murderer into your hands."

Leaving the unconscious man in the charge of my housekeeper, we all
three went down to the deadly lagoon. On the shingle there was piled a
little heap of towels and clothes left by the stricken man. Slowly I
walked round the edge of the water, my comrades in Indian file behind
me. Most of the pool was quite shallow, but under the cliff where the
beach was hollowed out it was four or five feet deep. It was to this
part that a swimmer would naturally go, for it formed a beautiful
pellucid green pool as clear as crystal. A line of rocks lay above it at
the base of the cliff, and along this I led the way, peering eagerly
into the depths beneath me. I had reached the deepest and stillest pool
when my eyes caught that for which they were searching, and I burst into
a shout of triumph.

"Cyanea!" I cried. "Cyanea! Behold the Lion's Mane!"

The strange object at which I pointed did indeed look like a tangled
mass torn from the mane of a lion. It lay upon a rocky shelf some three
feet under the water, a curious waving, vibrating, hairy creature with
streaks of silver among its yellow tresses. It pulsated with a slow,
heavy dilation and contraction.

"It has done mischief enough. Its day is over!" I cried. "Help me,
Stackhurst! Let us end the murderer forever."

There was a big boulder just above the ledge, and we pushed it until it
fell with a tremendous splash into the water. When the ripples had
cleared we saw that it had settled upon the ledge below. One flapping
edge of yellow membrane showed that our victim was beneath it. A thick
oily scum oozed out from below the stone and stained the water round,
rising slowly to the surface.

"Well, this gets me!" cried the inspector. "What was it, Mr. Holmes? I'm
born and bred in these parts, but I never saw such a thing. It don't
belong to Sussex."

"Just as well for Sussex," I remarked. "It may have been the southwest
gale that brought it up. Come back to my house, both of you, and I will
give you the terrible experience of one who has good reason to remember
his own meeting with the same peril of the seas."

When we reached my study we found that Murdoch was so far recovered that
he could sit up. He was dazed in mind, and every now and then was shaken
by a paroxysm of pain. In broken words he explained that he had no
notion what had occurred to him, save that terrific pangs had suddenly
shot through him, and that it had taken all his fortitude to reach the bank.

"Here is a book," I said, taking up the little volume, "which first
brought light into what might have been forever dark. It is Out of
Doors, by the famous observer, J. G. Wood. Wood himself very nearly
perished from contact with this vile creature, so he wrote with a very
full knowledge. Cyanea capillata is the miscreant's full name, and he
can be as dangerous to life as, and far more painful than, the bite of
the cobra. Let me briefly give this extract.

"If the bather should see a loose roundish mass of tawny membranes and
fibres, something like very large handfuls of lion's mane and silver
paper, let him beware, for this is the fearful stinger, Cyanea capillata.

Could our sinister acquaintance be more clearly described?

"He goes on to tell of his own encounter with one when swimming off the
coast of Kent. He found that the creature radiated almost invisible
filaments to the distance of fifty feet, and that anyone within that
circumference from the deadly centre was in danger of death. Even at a
distance the effect upon Wood was almost fatal.

"The multitudinous threads caused light scarlet lines upon the skin
which on closer examination resolved into minute dots or pustules, each
dot charged as it were with a red-hot needle making its way through the
nerves.

"The local pain was, as he explains, the least part of the exquisite
torment.

"Pangs shot through the chest, causing me to fall as if struck by a
bullet. The pulsation would cease, and then the heart would give six or
seven leaps as if it would force its way through the chest.

"It nearly killed him, although he had only been exposed to it in the
disturbed ocean and not in the narrow calm waters of a bathing-pool. He
says that he could hardly recognize himself afterwards, so white,
wrinkled and shrivelled was his face. He gulped down brandy, a whole
bottleful, and it seems to have saved his life. There is the book,
Inspector. I leave it with you, and you cannot doubt that it contains a
full explanation of the tragedy of poor McPherson."

"And incidentally exonerates me," remarked Ian Murdoch with a wry smile.
"I do not blame you, Inspector, nor you, Mr. Holmes, for your suspicions
were natural. I feel that on the very eve of my arrest I have only
cleared myself by sharing the fate of my poor friend."

"No, Mr. Murdoch. I was already upon the track, and had I been out as
early as I intended I might well have saved you from this terrific
experience."

"But how did you know, Mr. Holmes?"

"I am an omnivorous reader with a strangely retentive memory for
trifles. That phrase 'the Lion's Mane' haunted my mind. I knew that I
had seen it somewhere in an unexpected context. You have seen that it
does describe the creature. I have no doubt that it was floating on the
water when McPherson saw it, and that this phrase was the only one by
which he could convey to us a warning as to the creature which had been
his death."

"Then I, at least, am cleared," said Murdoch, rising slowly to his feet.
"There are one or two words of explanation which I should give, for I
know the direction in which your inquiries have run. It is true that I
loved this lady, but from the day when she chose my friend McPherson my
one desire was to help her to happiness. I was well content to stand
aside and act as their go-between. Often I carried their messages, and
it was because I was in their confidence and because she was so dear to
me that I hastened to tell her of my friend's death, lest someone should
forestall me in a more sudden and heartless manner. She would not tell
you, sir, of our relations lest you should disapprove and I might
suffer. But with your leave I must try to get back to The Gables, for my
bed will be very welcome."

Stackhurst held out his hand. "Our nerves have all been at
concert-pitch," said he. "Forgive what is past, Murdoch. We shall
understand each other better in the future." They passed out together
with their arms linked in friendly fashion. The inspector remained,
staring at me in silence with his ox-like eyes.

"Well, you've done it!" he cried at last. "I had read of you, but I
never believed it. It's wonderful!"

I was forced to shake my head. To accept such praise was to lower one's
own standards.

"I was slow at the outset -- culpably slow. Had the body been found in the
water I could hardly have missed it. It was the towel which misled me.
The poor fellow had never thought to dry himself, and so I in turn was
led to believe that he had never been in the water. Why, then, should
the attack of any water creature suggest itself to me? That was where I
went astray. Well, well, Inspector, I often ventured to chaff you
gentlemen of the police force, but Cyanea capillata very nearly avenged
Scotland Yard."

      The Adventure of the Veiled Lodger

When one considers that Mr. Sherlock Holmes was in active practice for
twenty-three years, and that during seventeen of these I was allowed to
cooperate with him and to keep notes of his doings, it will be clear
that I have a mass of material at my command. The problem has always
been not to find but to choose. There is the long row of year-books
which fill a shelf, and there are the dispatch-cases filled with
documents, a perfect quarry for the student not only of crime but of the
social and official scandals of the late Victorian era. Concerning these
latter, I may say that the writers of agonized letters, who beg that the
honour of their families or the reputation of famous forebears may not
be touched, have nothing to fear. The discretion and high sense of
professional honour which have always distinguished my friend are still
at work in the choice of these memoirs, and no confidence will be
abused. I deprecate, however, in the strongest way the attempts which
have been made lately to get at and to destroy these papers. The source
of these outrages is known, and if they are repeated I have Mr. Holmes's
authority for saying that the whole story concerning the politician, the
lighthouse, and the trained cormorant will be given to the public. There
is at least one reader who will understand.

It is not reasonable to suppose that every one of these cases gave
Holmes the opportunity of showing those curious gifts of instinct and
observation which I have endeavoured to set forth in these memoirs.
Sometimes he had with much effort to pick the fruit, sometimes it fell
easily into his lap. But the most terrible human tragedies were often
involved in those cases which brought him the fewest personal
opportunities, and it is one of these which I now desire to record. In
telling it, I have made a slight change of name and place, but otherwise
the facts are as stated.

One forenoon -- it was late in 1896 -- I received a hurried note from Holmes
asking for my attendance. When I arrived I found him seated in a
smoke-laden atmosphere, with an elderly, motherly woman of the buxom
landlady type in the corresponding chair in front of him.

"This is Mrs. Merrilow, of South Brixton," said my friend with a wave of
the hand. "Mrs. Merrilow does not object to tobacco, Watson, if you wish
to indulge your filthy habits. Mrs. Merrilow has an interesting story to
tell which may well lead to further developments in which your presence
may be useful."

"Anything I can do -- "

"You will understand, Mrs. Merrilow, that if I come to Mrs. Ronder I
should prefer to have a witness. You will make her understand that
before we arrive."

"Lord bless you, Mr. Holmes," said our visitor, "she is that anxious to
see you that you might bring the whole parish at your heels!"

"Then we shall come early in the afternoon. Let us see that we have our
facts correct before we start. If we go over them it will help Dr.
Watson to understand the situation. You say that Mrs. Ronder has been
your lodger for seven years and that you have only once seen her face."

"And I wish to God I had not!" said Mrs. Merrilow.

"It was, I understand, terribly mutilated."

"Well, Mr. Holmes, you would hardly say it was a face at all. That's how
it looked. Our milkman got a glimpse of her once peeping out of the
upper window, and he dropped his tin and the milk all over the front
garden. That is the kind of face it is. When I saw her -- I happened on her
unawares -- she covered up quick, and then she said, 'Now, Mrs. Merrilow,
you know at last why it is that I never raise my veil.'"

"Do you know anything about her history?"

"Nothing at all."

"Did she give references when she came?"

"No, sir, but she gave hard cash, and plenty of it. A quarter's rent
right down on the table in advance and no arguing about terms. In these
times a poor woman like me can't afford to turn down a chance like that."

"Did she give any reason for choosing your house?"

"Mine stands well back from the road and is more private than most.
Then, again, I only take the one, and I have no family of my own. I
reckon she had tried others and found that mine suited her best. It's
privacy she is after, and she is ready to pay for it."

"You say that she never showed her face from first to last save on the
one accidental occasion. Well, it is a very remarkable story, most
remarkable, and I don't wonder that you want it examined."

"I don't, Mr. Holmes. I am quite satisfied so long as I get my rent. You
could not have a quieter lodger, or one who gives less trouble."

"Then what has brought matters to a head?"

"Her health, Mr. Holmes. She seems to be wasting away. And there's
something terrible on her mind. 'Murder!' she cries. 'Murder!' And once
I heard her: 'You cruel beast! You monster!' she cried. It was in the
night, and it fair rang through the house and sent the shivers through
me. So I went to her in the morning. 'Mrs. Ronder,' I says, 'if you have
anything that is troubling your soul, there's the clergy,' I says, 'and
there's the police. Between them you should get some help.' 'For God's
sake, not the police!' says she, 'and the clergy can't change what is
past. And yet,' she says, 'it would ease my mind if someone knew the
truth before I died.' 'Well,' says I, 'if you won't have the regulars,
there is this detective man what we read about' -- beggin' your pardon, Mr.
Holmes. And she, she fair jumped at it. 'That's the man,' says she. 'I
wonder I never thought of it before. Bring him here, Mrs. Merrilow, and
if he won't come, tell him I am the wife of Ronder's wild beast show.
Say that, and give him the name Abbas Parva. Here it is as she wrote it,
Abbas Parva. 'That will bring him if he's the man I think he is.'"

"And it will, too," remarked Holmes. "Very good, Mrs. Merrilow. I should
like to have a little chat with Dr. Watson. That will carry us till
lunch-time. About three o'clock you may expect to see us at your house
in Brixton."

Our visitor had no sooner waddled out of the room -- no other verb can
describe Mrs. Merrilow's method of progression -- than Sherlock Holmes
threw himself with fierce energy upon the pile of commonplace books in
the corner. For a few minutes there was a constant swish of the leaves,
and then with a grunt of satisfaction he came upon what he sought. So
excited was he that he did not rise, but sat upon the floor like some
strange Buddha, with crossed legs, the huge books all round him, and one
open upon his knees.

"The case worried me at the time, Watson. Here are my marginal notes to
prove it. I confess that I could make nothing of it. And yet I was
convinced that the coroner was wrong. Have you no recollection of the
Abbas Parva tragedy?"

"None, Holmes."

"And yet you were with me then. But certainly my own impression was very
superficial. For there was nothing to go by, and none of the parties had
engaged my services. Perhaps you would care to read the papers?"

"Could you not give me the points?"

"That is very easily done. It will probably come back to your memory as
I talk. Ronder, of course, was a household word. He was the rival of
Wombwell, and of Sanger, one of the greatest showmen of his day. There
is evidence, however, that he took to drink, and that both he and his
show were on the down grade at the time of the great tragedy. The
caravan had halted for the night at Abbas Parva, which is a small
village in Berkshire, when this horror occurred. They were on their way
to Wimbledon, travelling by road, and they were simply camping and not
exhibiting, as the place is so small a one that it would not have paid
them to open.

"They had among their exhibits a very fine North African lion. Sahara
King was its name, and it was the habit, both of Ronder and his wife, to
give exhibitions inside its cage. Here, you see, is a photograph of the
performance by which you will perceive that Ronder was a huge porcine
person and that his wife was a very magnificent woman. It was deposed at
the inquest that there had been some signs that the lion was dangerous,
but, as usual, familiarity begat contempt, and no notice was taken of
the fact.

"It was usual for either Ronder or his wife to feed the lion at night.
Sometimes one went, sometimes both, but they never allowed anyone else
to do it, for they believed that so long as they were the food-carriers
he would regard them as benefactors and would never molest them. On this
particular night, seven years ago, they both went, and a very terrible
happening followed, the details of which have never been made clear.

"It seems that the whole camp was roused near midnight by the roars of
the animal and the screams of the woman. The different grooms and
employees rushed from their tents, carrying lanterns, and by their light
an awful sight was revealed. Ronder lay, with the back of his head
crushed in and deep claw-marks across his scalp, some ten yards from the
cage, which was open. Close to the door of the cage lay Mrs. Ronder upon
her back, with the creature squatting and snarling above her. It had
torn her face in such a fashion that it was never thought that she could
live. Several of the circus men, headed by Leonardo, the strong man, and
Griggs, the clown, drove the creature off with poles, upon which it
sprang back into the cage and was at once locked in. How it had got
loose was a mystery. It was conjectured that the pair intended to enter
the cage, but that when the door was loosed the creature bounded out
upon them. There was no other point of interest in the evidence save
that the woman in a delirium of agony kept screaming, 'Coward! Coward!'
as she was carried back to the van in which they lived. It was six
months before she was fit to give evidence, but the inquest was duly
held, with the obvious verdict of death from misadventure."

"What alternative could be conceived?" said I.

"You may well say so. And yet there were one or two points which worried
young Edmunds, of the Berkshire Constabulary. A smart lad that! He was
sent later to Allahabad. That was how I came into the matter, for he
dropped in and smoked a pipe or two over it."

"A thin, yellow-haired man?"

"Exactly. I was sure you would pick up the trail presently."

"But what worried him?"

"Well, we were both worried. It was so deucedly difficult to reconstruct
the affair. Look at it from the lion's point of view. He is liberated.
What does he do? He takes half a dozen bounds forward, which brings him
to Ronder. Ronder turns to fly -- the claw-marks were on the back of his
head -- but the lion strikes him down. Then, instead of bounding on and
escaping, he returns to the woman, who was close to the cage, and he
knocks her over and chews her face up. Then, again, those cries of hers
would seem to imply that her husband had in some way failed her. What
could the poor devil have done to help her? You see the difficulty?"

"Quite."

"And then there was another thing. It comes back to me now as I think it
over. There was some evidence that just at the time the lion roared and
the woman screamed, a man began shouting in terror."

"This man Ronder, no doubt."

"Well, if his skull was smashed in you would hardly expect to hear from
him again. There were at least two witnesses who spoke of the cries of a
man being mingled with those of a woman."

"I should think the whole camp was crying out by then. As to the other
points, I think I could suggest a solution."

"I should be glad to consider it."

"The two were together, ten yards from the cage, when the lion got
loose. The man turned and was struck down. The woman conceived the idea
of getting into the cage and shutting the door. It was her only refuge.
She made for it, and just as she reached it the beast bounded after her
and knocked her over. She was angry with her husband for having
encouraged the beast's rage by turning. If they had faced it they might
have cowed it. Hence her cries of 'Coward!'"

"Brilliant, Watson! Only one flaw in your diamond."

"What is the flaw, Holmes?"

"If they were both ten paces from the cage, how came the beast to get
loose?"

"Is it possible that they had some enemy who loosed it?"

"And why should it attack them savagely when it was in the habit of
playing with them, and doing tricks with them inside the cage?"

"Possibly the same enemy had done something to enrage it."

Holmes looked thoughtful and remained in silence for some moments.

"Well, Watson, there is this to be said for your theory. Ronder was a
man of many enemies. Edmunds told me that in his cups he was horrible. A
huge bully of a man, he cursed and slashed at everyone who came in his
way. I expect those cries about a monster, of which our visitor has
spoken, were nocturnal reminiscences of the dear departed. However, our
speculations are futile until we have all the facts. There is a cold
partridge on the sideboard, Watson, and a bottle of Montrachet. Let us
renew our energies before we make a fresh call upon them."

When our hansom deposited us at the house of Mrs. Merrilow, we found
that plump lady blocking up the open door of her humble but retired
abode. It was very clear that her chief preoccupation was lest she
should lose a valuable lodger, and she implored us, before showing us
up, to say and do nothing which could lead to so undesirable an end.
Then, having reassured her, we followed her up the straight, badly
carpeted staircase and were shown into the room of the mysterious lodger.

It was a close, musty, ill-ventilated place, as might be expected, since
its inmate seldom left it. From keeping beasts in a cage, the woman
seemed, by some retribution of fate, to have become herself a beast in a
cage. She sat now in a broken armchair in the shadowy corner of the
room. Long years of inaction had coarsened the lines of her figure, but
at some period it must have been beautiful, and was still full and
voluptuous. A thick dark veil covered her face, but it was cut off close
at her upper lip and disclosed a perfectly shaped mouth and a delicately
rounded chin. I could well conceive that she had indeed been a very
remarkable woman. Her voice, too, was well modulated and pleasing.

"My name is not unfamiliar to you, Mr. Holmes," said she. "I thought
that it would bring you."

"That is so, madam, though I do not know how you are aware that I was
interested in your case."

"I learned it when I had recovered my health and was examined by Mr.
Edmunds, the county detective. I fear I lied to him. Perhaps it would
have been wiser had I told the truth."

"It is usually wiser to tell the truth. But why did you lie to him?"

"Because the fate of someone else depended upon it. I know that he was a
very worthless being, and yet I would not have his destruction upon my
conscience. We had been so close -- so close!"

"But has this impediment been removed?"

"Yes, sir. The person that I allude to is dead."

"Then why should you not now tell the police anything you know?"

"Because there is another person to be considered. That other person is
myself. I could not stand the scandal and publicity which would come
from a police examination. I have not long to live, but I wish to die
undisturbed. And yet I wanted to find one man of judgment to whom I
could tell my terrible story, so that when I am gone all might be
understood."

"You compliment me, madam. At the same time, I am a responsible person.
I do not promise you that when you have spoken I may not myself think it
my duty to refer the case to the police."

"I think not, Mr. Holmes. I know your character and methods too well,
for I have followed your work for some years. Reading is the only
pleasure which fate has left me, and I miss little which passes in the
world. But in any case, I will take my chance of the use which you may
make of my tragedy. It will ease my mind to tell it."

"My friend and I would be glad to hear it."

The woman rose and took from a drawer the photograph of a man. He was
clearly a professional acrobat, a man of magnificent physique, taken
with his huge arms folded across his swollen chest and a smile breaking
from under his heavy moustache -- the self-satisfied smile of the man of
many conquests.

"That is Leonardo," she said.

"Leonardo, the strong man, who gave evidence?"

"The same. And this -- this is my husband."

It was a dreadful face -- a human pig, or rather a human wild boar, for it
was formidable in its bestiality. One could imagine that vile mouth
champing and foaming in its rage, and one could conceive those small,
vicious eyes darting pure malignancy as they looked forth upon the
world. Ruffian, bully, beast -- it was all written on that heavy-jowled face.

"Those two pictures will help you, gentlemen, to understand the story. I
was a poor circus girl brought up on the sawdust, and doing springs
through the hoop before I was ten. When I became a woman this man loved
me, if such lust as his can be called love, and in an evil moment I
became his wife. From that day I was in hell, and he the devil who
tormented me. There was no one in the show who did not know of his
treatment. He deserted me for others. He tied me down and lashed me with
his riding-whip when I complained. They all pitied me and they all
loathed him, but what could they do? They feared him, one and all. For
he was terrible at all times, and murderous when he was drunk. Again and
again he was had up for assault, and for cruelty to the beasts, but he
had plenty of money and the fines were nothing to him. The best men all
left us, and the show began to go downhill. It was only Leonardo and I
who kept it up -- with little Jimmy Griggs, the clown. Poor devil, he had
not much to be funny about, but he did what he could to hold things
together.

"Then Leonardo came more and more into my life. You see what he was
like. I know now the poor spirit that was hidden in that splendid body,
but compared to my husband he seemed like the angel Gabriel. He pitied
me and helped me, till at last our intimacy turned to love -- deep, deep,
passionate love, such love as I had dreamed of but never hoped to feel.
My husband suspected it, but I think that he was a coward as well as a
bully, and that Leonardo was the one man that he was afraid of. He took
revenge in his own way by torturing me more than ever. One night my
cries brought Leonardo to the door of our van. We were near tragedy that
night, and soon my lover and I understood that it could not be avoided.
My husband was not fit to live. We planned that he should die.

"Leonardo had a clever, scheming brain. It was he who planned it. I do
not say that to blame him, for I was ready to go with him every inch of
the way. But I should never have had the wit to think of such a plan. We
made a club -- Leonardo made it -- and in the leaden head he fastened five
long steel nails, the points outward, with just such a spread as the
lion's paw. This was to give my husband his death-blow, and yet to leave
the evidence that it was the lion which we would loose who had done the
deed.

"It was a pitch-dark night when my husband and I went down, as was our
custom, to feed the beast. We carried with us the raw meat in a zinc
pail. Leonardo was waiting at the corner of the big van which we should
have to pass before we reached the cage. He was too slow, and we walked
past him before he could strike, but he followed us on tiptoe and I
heard the crash as the club smashed my husband's skull. My heart leaped
with joy at the sound. I sprang forward, and I undid the catch which
held the door of the great lion's cage.

"And then the terrible thing happened. You may have heard how quick
these creatures are to scent human blood, and how it excites them. Some
strange instinct had told the creature in one instant that a human being
had been slain. As I slipped the bars it bounded out and was on me in an
instant. Leonardo could have saved me. If he had rushed forward and
struck the beast with his club he might have cowed it. But the man lost
his nerve. I heard him shout in his terror, and then I saw him turn and
fly. At the same instant the teeth of the lion met in my face. Its hot,
filthy breath had already poisoned me and I was hardly conscious of
pain. With the palms of my hands I tried to push the great steaming,
blood-stained jaws away from me, and I screamed for help. I was
conscious that the camp was stirring, and then dimly I remembered a
group of men. Leonardo, Griggs, and others, dragging me from under the
creature's paws. That was my last memory, Mr. Holmes, for many a weary
month. When I came to myself and saw myself in the mirror, I cursed that
lion -- oh, how I cursed him! -- not because he had torn away my beauty but
because he had not torn away my life. I had but one desire, Mr. Holmes,
and I had enough money to gratify it. It was that I should cover myself
so that my poor face should be seen by none, and that I should dwell
where none whom I had ever known should find me. That was all that was
left to me to do -- and that is what I have done. A poor wounded beast that
has crawled into its hole to die -- that is the end of Eugenia Ronder."

We sat in silence for some time after the unhappy woman had told her
story. Then Holmes stretched out his long arm and patted her hand with
such a show of sympathy as I had seldom known him to exhibit.

"Poor girl!" he said. "Poor girl! The ways of fate are indeed hard to
understand. If there is not some compensation hereafter, then the world
is a cruel jest. But what of this man Leonardo?"

"I never saw him or heard from him again. Perhaps I have been wrong to
feel so bitterly against him. He might as soon have loved one of the
freaks whom we carried round the country as the thing which the lion had
left. But a woman's love is not so easily set aside. He had left me
under the beast's claws, he had deserted me in my need, and yet I could
not bring myself to give him to the gallows. For myself, I cared nothing
what became of me. What could be more dreadful than my actual life? But
I stood between Leonardo and his fate."

"And he is dead?"

"He was drowned last month when bathing near Margate. I saw his death in
the paper."

"And what did he do with this five-clawed club, which is the most
singular and ingenious part of all your story?"

"I cannot tell, Mr. Holmes. There is a chalk-pit by the camp, with a
deep green pool at the base of it. Perhaps in the depths of that pool -- "

"Well, well, it is of little consequence now. The case is closed."

"Yes," said the woman, "the case is closed."

We had risen to go, but there was something in the woman's voice which
arrested Holmes's attention. He turned swiftly upon her.

"Your life is not your own," he said. "Keep your hands off it."

"What use is it to anyone?"

"How can you tell? The example of patient suffering is in itself the
most precious of all lessons to an impatient world."

The woman's answer was a terrible one. She raised her veil and stepped
forward into the light.

"I wonder if you would bear it," she said.

It was horrible. No words can describe the framework of a face when the
face itself is gone. Two living and beautiful brown eyes looking sadly
out from that grisly ruin did but make the view more awful. Holmes held
up his hand in a gesture of pity and protest, and together we left the room.

Two days later, when I called upon my friend, he pointed with some pride
to a small blue bottle upon his mantelpiece. I picked it up. There was a
red poison label. A pleasant almondy odour rose when I opened it.

"Prussic acid?" said I.

"Exactly. It came by post. 'I send you my temptation. I will follow your
advice.' That was the message. I think, Watson, we can guess the name of
the brave woman who sent it."

      The Adventure of Shoscombe Old Place

Sherlock Holmes had been bending for a long time over a low-power
microscope. Now he straightened himself up and looked round at me in
triumph.

"It is glue, Watson," said he. "Unquestionably it is glue. Have a look
at these scattered objects in the field!"

I stooped to the eyepiece and focussed for my vision.

"Those hairs are threads from a tweed coat. The irregular gray masses
are dust. There are epithelial scales on the left. Those brown blobs in
the centre are undoubtedly glue."

"Well," I said, laughing, "I am prepared to take your word for it. Does
anything depend upon it?"

"It is a very fine demonstration," he answered. "In the St. Pancras case
you may remember that a cap was found beside the dead policeman. The
accused man denies that it is his. But he is a picture-frame maker who
habitually handles glue."

"Is it one of your cases?"

"No; my friend, Merivale, of the Yard, asked me to look into the case.
Since I ran down that coiner by the zinc and copper filings in the seam
of his cuff they have begun to realize the importance of the
microscope." He looked impatiently at his watch. "I had a new client
calling, but he is overdue. By the way, Watson, you know something of
racing?"

"I ought to. I pay for it with about half my wound pension."

"Then I'll make you my 'Handy Guide to the Turf.' What about Sir Robert
Norberton? Does the name recall anything?"

"Well, I should say so. He lives at Shoscombe Old Place, and I know it
well, for my summer quarters were down there once. Norberton nearly came
within your province once."

"How was that?"

"It was when he horsewhipped Sam Brewer, the well-known Curzon Street
money-lender, on Newmarket Heath. He nearly killed the man."

"Ah, he sounds interesting! Does he often indulge in that way?"

"Well, he has the name of being a dangerous man. He is about the most
daredevil rider in England -- second in the Grand National a few years
back. He is one of those men who have overshot their true generation. He
should have been a buck in the days of the Regency -- a boxer, an athlete,
a plunger on the turf, a lover of fair ladies, and, by all account, so
far down Queer Street that he may never find his way back again."

"Capital, Watson! A thumb-nail sketch. I seem to know the man. Now, can
you give me some idea of Shoscombe Old Place?"

"Only that it is in the centre of Shoscombe Park, and that the famous
Shoscombe stud and training quarters are to be found there."

"And the head trainer," said Holmes, "is John Mason. You need not look
surprised at my knowledge, Watson, for this is a letter from him which I
am unfolding. But let us have some more about Shoscombe. I seem to have
struck a rich vein."

"There are the Shoscombe spaniels," said I. "You hear of them at every
dog show. The most exclusive breed in England. They are the special
pride of the lady of Shoscombe Old Place."

"Sir Robert Norberton's wife, I presume!"

"Sir Robert has never married. Just as well, I think, considering his
prospects. He lives with his widowed sister, Lady Beatrice Falder."

"You mean that she lives with him?"

"No, no. The place belonged to her late husband, Sir James. Norberton
has no claim on it at all. It is only a life interest and reverts to her
husband's brother. Meantime, she draws the rents every year."

"And brother Robert, I suppose, spends the said rents?"

"That is about the size of it. He is a devil of a fellow and must lead
her a most uneasy life. Yet I have heard that she is devoted to him. But
what is amiss at Shoscombe?"

"Ah, that is just what I want to know. And here, I expect, is the man
who can tell us."

The door had opened and the page had shown in a tall, clean-shaven man
with the firm, austere expression which is only seen upon those who have
to control horses or boys. Mr. John Mason had many of both under his
sway, and he looked equal to the task. He bowed with cold
self-possession and seated himself upon the chair to which Holmes had
waved him.

"You had my note, Mr. Holmes?"

"Yes, but it explained nothing."

"It was too delicate a thing for me to put the details on paper. And too
complicated. It was only face to face I could do it."

"Well, we are at your disposal."

"First of all, Mr. Holmes, I think that my employer, Sir Robert, has
gone mad."

Holmes raised his eyebrows. "This is Baker Street, not Harley Street,"
said he. "But why do you say so?"

"Well, sir, when a man does one queer thing, or two queer things, there
may be a meaning to it, but when everything he does is queer, then you
begin to wonder. I believe Shoscombe Prince and the Derby have turned
his brain."

"That is a colt you are running?"

"The best in England, Mr. Holmes. I should know, if anyone does. Now,
I'll be plain with you, for I know you are gentlemen of honour and that
it won't go beyond the room. Sir Robert has got to win this Derby. He's
up to the neck, and it's his last chance. Everything he could raise or
borrow is on the horse -- and at fine odds, too! You can get forties now,
but it was nearer the hundred when he began to back him."

"But how is that if the horse is so good?"

"The public don't know how good he is. Sir Robert has been too clever
for the touts. He has the Prince's half-brother out for spins. You can't
tell 'em apart. But there are two lengths in a furlong between them when
it comes to a gallop. He thinks of nothing but the horse and the race.
His whole life is on it. He's holding off the Jews till then. If the
Prince fails him he is done."

"It seems a rather desperate gamble, but where does the madness come in?"

"Well, first of all, you have only to look at him. I don't believe he
sleeps at night. He is down at the stables at all hours. His eyes are
wild. It has all been too much for his nerves. Then there is his conduct
to Lady Beatrice!"

"Ah! What is that?"

"They have always been the best of friends. They had the same tastes,
the two of them, and she loved the horses as much as he did. Every day
at the same hour she would drive down to see them -- and, above all, she
loved the Prince. He would prick up his ears when he heard the wheels on
the gravel, and he would trot out each morning to the carriage to get
his lump of sugar. But that's all over now."

"Why?"

"Well, she seems to have lost all interest in the horses. For a week now
she has driven past the stables with never so much as 'Good-morning'!"

"You think there has been a quarrel?"

"And a bitter, savage, spiteful quarrel at that. Why else would he give
away her pet spaniel that she loved as if he were her child? He gave it
a few days ago to old Barnes, what keeps the Green Dragon, three miles
off, at Crendall."

"That certainly did seem strange."

"Of course, with her weak heart and dropsy one couldn't expect that she
could get about with him, but he spent two hours every evening in her
room. He might well do what he could, for she has been a rare good
friend to him. But that's all over, too. He never goes near her. And she
takes it to heart. She is brooding and sulky and drinking, Mr.
Holmes -- drinking like a fish."

"Did she drink before this estrangement?"

"Well, she took her glass, but now it is often a whole bottle of an
evening. So Stephens, the butler, told me. It's all changed, Mr. Holmes,
and there is something damned rotten about it. But then, again, what is
master doing down at the old church crypt at night? And who is the man
that meets him there?"

Holmes rubbed his hands.

"Go on, Mr. Mason. You get more and more interesting."

"It was the butler who saw him go. Twelve o'clock at night and raining
hard. So next night I was up at the house and, sure enough, master was
off again. Stephens and I went after him, but it was jumpy work, for it
would have been a bad job if he had seen us. He's a terrible man with
his fists if he gets started, and no respecter of persons. So we were
shy of getting too near, but we marked him down all right. It was the
haunted crypt that he was making for, and there was a man waiting for
him there."

"What is this haunted crypt?"

"Well, sir, there is an old ruined chapel in the park. It is so old that
nobody could fix its date. And under it there's a crypt which has a bad
name among us. It's a dark, damp, lonely place by day, but there are few
in that county that would have the nerve to go near it at night. But
master's not afraid. He never feared anything in his life. But what is
he doing there in the night-time?"

"Wait a bit!" said Holmes. "You say there is another man there. It must
be one of your own stablemen, or someone from the house! Surely you have
only to spot who it is and question him?"

"It's no one I know."

"How can you say that?"

"Because I have seen him, Mr. Holmes. It was on that second night. Sir
Robert turned and passed us -- me and Stephens, quaking in the bushes like
two bunny-rabbits, for there was a bit of moon that night. But we could
hear the other moving about behind. We were not afraid of him. So we up
when Sir Robert was gone and pretended we were just having a walk like
in the moonlight, and so we came right on him as casual and innocent as
you please. 'Hullo, mate! who may you be?' says I. I guess he had not
heard us coming, so he looked over his shoulder with a face as if he had
seen the devil coming out of hell. He let out a yell, and away he went
as hard as he could lick it in the darkness. He could run! -- I'll give him
that. In a minute he was out of sight and hearing, and who he was, or
what he was, we never found."

"But you saw him clearly in the moonlight?"

"Yes, I would swear to his yellow face -- a mean dog, I should say. What
could he have in common with Sir Robert?"

Holmes sat for some time lost in thought.

"Who keeps Lady Beatrice Falder company?" he asked at last.

"There is her maid, Carrie Evans. She has been with her this five years."

"And is, no doubt, devoted?"

Mr. Mason shuffled uncomfortably.

"She's devoted enough," he answered at last. "But I won't say to whom."

"Ah!" said Holmes.

"I can't tell tales out of school."

"I quite understand, Mr. Mason. Of course, the situation is clear
enough. From Dr. Watson's description of Sir Robert I can realize that
no woman is safe from him. Don't you think the quarrel between brother
and sister may lie there?"

"Well, the scandal has been pretty clear for a long time."

"But she may not have seen it before. Let us suppose that she has
suddenly found it out. She wants to get rid of the woman. Her brother
will not permit it. The invalid, with her weak heart and inability to
get about, has no means of enforcing her will. The hated maid is still
tied to her. The lady refuses to speak, sulks, takes to drink. Sir
Robert in his anger takes her pet spaniel away from her. Does not all
this hang together?"

"Well, it might do -- so far as it goes."

"Exactly! As far as it goes. How would all that bear upon the visits by
night to the old crypt? We can't fit that into our plot."

"No, sir, and there is something more that I can't fit in. Why should
Sir Robert want to dig up a dead body?"

Holmes sat up abruptly.

"We only found it out yesterday -- after I had written to you. Yesterday
Sir Robert had gone to London, so Stephens and I went down to the crypt.
It was all in order, sir, except that in one corner was a bit of a human
body."

"You informed the police, I suppose?"

Our visitor smiled grimly.

"Well, sir, I think it would hardly interest them. It was just the head
and a few bones of a mummy. It may have been a thousand years old. But
it wasn't there before. That I'll swear, and so will Stephens. It had
been stowed away in a corner and covered over with a board, but that
corner had always been empty before."

"What did you do with it?"

"Well, we just left it there."

"That was wise. You say Sir Robert was away yesterday. Has he returned?"

"We expect him back to-day."

"When did Sir Robert give away his sister's dog?"

"It was just a week ago to-day. The creature was howling outside the old
well-house, and Sir Robert was in one of his tantrums that morning. He
caught it up, and I thought he would have killed it. Then he gave it to
Sandy Bain, the jockey, and told him to take the dog to old Barnes at
the Green Dragon, for he never wished to see it again."

Holmes sat for some time in silent thought. He had lit the oldest and
foulest of his pipes.

"I am not clear yet what you want me to do in this matter, Mr. Mason,"
he said at last. "Can't you make it more definite?"

"Perhaps this will make it more definite, Mr. Holmes," said our visitor.

He took a paper from his pocket, and, unwrapping it carefully, he
exposed a charred fragment of bone.

Holmes examined it with interest.

"Where did you get it?"

"There is a central heating furnace in the cellar under Lady Beatrice's
room. It's been off for some time, but Sir Robert complained of cold and
had it on again. Harvey runs it -- he's one of my lads. This very morning
he came to me with this which he found raking out the cinders. He didn't
like the look of it."

"Nor do I," said Holmes. "What do you make of it, Watson?"

It was burned to a black cinder, but there could be no question as to
its anatomical significance.

"It's the upper condyle of a human femur," said I.

"Exactly!" Holmes had become very serious. "When does this lad tend to
the furnace?"

"He makes it up every evening and then leaves it."

"Then anyone could visit it during the night?"

"Yes, sir."

"Can you enter it from outside?"

"There is one door from outside. There is another which leads up by a
stair to the passage in which Lady Beatrice's room is situated."

"These are deep waters, Mr. Mason; deep and rather dirty. You say that
Sir Robert was not at home last night?"

"No, sir."

"Then, whoever was burning bones, it was not he."

"That's true, sir."

"What is the name of that inn you spoke of?"

"The Green Dragon."

"Is there good fishing in that part of Berkshire?" The honest trainer
showed very clearly upon his face that he was convinced that yet another
lunatic had come into his harassed life.

"Well, sir, I've heard there are trout in the mill-stream and pike in
the Hall lake."

"That's good enough. Watson and I are famous fishermen -- are we not,
Watson? You may address us in future at the Green Dragon. We should
reach it to-night. I need not say that we don't want to see you, Mr.
Mason, but a note will reach us, and no doubt I could find you if I want
you. When we have gone a little farther into the matter I will let you
have a considered opinion."

Thus it was that on a bright May evening Holmes and I found ourselves
alone in a first-class carriage and bound for the little
"halt-on-demand" station of Shoscombe. The rack above us was covered
with a formidable litter of rods, reels, and baskets. On reaching our
destination a short drive took us to an old-fashioned tavern, where a
sporting host, Josiah Barnes, entered eagerly into our plans for the
extirpation of the fish of the neighbourhood.

"What about the Hall lake and the chance of a pike?" said Holmes.

The face of the innkeeper clouded.

"That wouldn't do, sir. You might chance to find yourself in the lake
before you were through."

"How's that, then?"

"It's Sir Robert, sir. He's terrible jealous of touts. If you two
strangers were as near his training quarters as that he'd be after you
as sure as fate. He ain't taking no chances, Sir Robert ain't."

"I've heard he has a horse entered for the Derby."

"Yes, and a good colt, too. He carries all our money for the race, and
all Sir Robert's into the bargain. By the way" -- he looked at us with
thoughtful eyes -- "I suppose you ain't on the turf yourselves?"

"No, indeed. Just two weary Londoners who badly need some good Berkshire
air."

"Well, you are in the right place for that. There is a deal of it lying
about. But mind what I have told you about Sir Robert. He's the sort
that strikes first and speaks afterwards. Keep clear of the park."

"Surely, Mr. Barnes! We certainly shall. By the way, that was a most
beautiful spaniel that was whining in the hall."

"I should say it was. That was the real Shoscombe breed. There ain't a
better in England."

"I am a dog-fancier myself," said Holmes. "Now, if it is a fair
question, what would a prize dog like that cost?"

"More than I could pay, sir. It was Sir Robert himself who gave me this
one. That's why I have to keep it on a lead. It would be off to the Hall
in a jiffy if I gave it its head."

"We are getting some cards in our hand, Watson," said Holmes when the
landlord had left us. "It's not an easy one to play, but we may see our
way in a day or two. By the way, Sir Robert is still in London, I hear.
We might, perhaps, enter the sacred domain to-night without fear of
bodily assault. There are one or two points on which I should like
reassurance."

"Have you any theory, Holmes?"

"Only this, Watson, that something happened a week or so ago which has
cut deep into the life of the Shoscombe household. What is that
something? We can only guess at it from its effects. They seem to be of
a curiously mixed character. But that should surely help us. It is only
the colourless, uneventful case which is hopeless.

"Let us consider our data. The brother no longer visits the beloved
invalid sister. He gives away her favourite dog. Her dog, Watson! Does
that suggest nothing to you?"

"Nothing but the brother's spite."

"Well, it might be so. Or -- well, there is an alternative. Now to continue
our review of the situation from the time that the quarrel, if there is
a quarrel, began. The lady keeps her room, alters her habits, is not
seen save when she drives out with her maid, refuses to stop at the
stables to greet her favourite horse, and apparently takes to drink.
That covers the case, does it not?"

"Save for the business in the crypt."

"That is another line of thought. There are two, and I beg you will not
tangle them. Line A, which concerns Lady Beatrice, has a vaguely
sinister flavour, has it not?"

"I can make nothing of it."

"Well, now, let us take up line B, which concerns Sir Robert. He is mad
keen upon winning the Derby. He is in the hands of the Jews, and may at
any moment be sold up and his racing stables seized by his creditors. He
is a daring and desperate man. He derives his income from his sister.
His sister's maid is his willing tool. So far we seem to be on fairly
safe ground, do we not?"

"But the crypt?"

"Ah, yes, the crypt! Let us suppose, Watson -- it is merely a scandalous
supposition, a hypothesis put forward for argument's sake -- that Sir
Robert has done away with his sister."

"My dear Holmes, it is out of the question."

"Very possibly, Watson. Sir Robert is a man of an honourable stock. But
you do occasionally find a carrion crow among the eagles. Let us for a
moment argue upon this supposition. He could not fly the country until
he had realized his fortune, and that fortune could only be realized by
bringing off this coup with Shoscombe Prince. Therefore, he has still to
stand his ground. To do this he would have to dispose of the body of his
victim, and he would also have to find a substitute who would
impersonate her. With the maid as his confidante that would not be
impossible. The woman's body might be conveyed to the crypt, which is a
place so seldom visited, and it might be secretly destroyed at night in
the furnace, leaving behind it such evidence as we have already seen.
What say you to that, Watson?"

"Well, it is all possible if you grant the original monstrous supposition."

"I think that there is a small experiment which we may try to-morrow,
Watson, in order to throw some light on the matter. Meanwhile, if we
mean to keep up our characters, I suggest that we have our host in for a
glass of his own wine and hold some high converse upon eels and dace,
which seems to be the straight road to his affections. We may chance to
come upon some useful local gossip in the process."

In the morning Holmes discovered that we had come without our spoon-bait
for jack, which absolved us from fishing for the day. About eleven
o'clock we started for a walk, and he obtained leave to take the black
spaniel with us.

"This is the place," said he as we came to two high park gates with
heraldic griffins towering above them. "About midday, Mr. Barnes informs
me, the old lady takes a drive, and the carriage must slow down while
the gates are opened. When it comes through, and before it gathers
speed, I want you, Watson, to stop the coachman with some question.
Never mind me. I shall stand behind this holly-bush and see what I can see."

It was not a long vigil. Within a quarter of an hour we saw the big open
yellow barouche coming down the long avenue, with two splendid,
high-stepping gray carriage horses in the shafts. Holmes crouched behind
his bush with the dog. I stood unconcernedly swinging a cane in the
roadway. A keeper ran out and the gates swung open.

The carriage had slowed to a walk, and I was able to get a good look at
the occupants. A highly coloured young woman with flaxen hair and
impudent eyes sat on the left. At her right was an elderly person with
rounded back and a huddle of shawls about her face and shoulders which
proclaimed the invalid. When the horses reached the highroad I held up
my hand with an authoritative gesture, and as the coachman pulled up I
inquired if Sir Robert was at Shoscombe Old Place.

At the same moment Holmes stepped out and released the spaniel. With a
joyous cry it dashed forward to the carriage and sprang upon the step.
Then in a moment its eager greeting changed to furious rage, and it
snapped at the black skirt above it.

"Drive on! Drive on!" shrieked a harsh voice. The coachman lashed the
horses, and we were left standing in the roadway.

"Well, Watson, that's done it," said Holmes as he fastened the lead to
the neck of the excited spaniel. "He thought it was his mistress, and he
found it was a stranger. Dogs don't make mistakes."

"But it was the voice of a man!" I cried.

"Exactly! We have added one card to our hand, Watson, but it needs
careful playing, all the same."

My companion seemed to have no further plans for the day, and we did
actually use our fishing tackle in the mill-stream, with the result that
we had a dish of trout for our supper. It was only after that meal that
Holmes showed signs of renewed activity. Once more we found ourselves
upon the same road as in the morning, which led us to the park gates. A
tall, dark figure was awaiting us there, who proved to be our London
acquaintance, Mr. John Mason, the trainer.

"Good-evening, gentlemen," said he. "I got your note, Mr. Holmes. Sir
Robert has not returned yet, but I hear that he is expected to-night."

"How far is this crypt from the house?" asked Holmes.

"A good quarter of a mile."

"Then I think we can disregard him altogether."

"I can't afford to do that, Mr. Holmes. The moment he arrives he will
want to see me to get the last news of Shoscombe Prince."

"I see! In that case we must work without you, Mr. Mason. You can show
us the crypt and then leave us."

It was pitch-dark and without a moon, but Mason led us over the
grass-lands until a dark mass loomed up in front of us which proved to
be the ancient chapel. We entered the broken gap which was once the
porch, and our guide, stumbling among heaps of loose masonry, picked his
way to the corner of the building, where a steep stair led down into the
crypt. Striking a match, he illuminated the melancholy place -- dismal and
evil-smelling, with ancient crumbling walls of rough-hewn stone, and
piles of coffins, some of lead and some of stone, extending upon one
side right up to the arched and groined roof which lost itself in the
shadows above our heads. Holmes had lit his lantern, which shot a tiny
tunnel of vivid yellow light upon the mournful scene. Its rays were
reflected back from the coffin-plates, many of them adorned with the
griffin and coronet of this old family which carried its honours even to
the gate of Death.

"You spoke of some bones, Mr. Mason. Could you show them before you go?"

"They are here in this corner." The trainer strode across and then stood
in silent surprise as our light was turned upon the place. "They are
gone," said he.

"So I expected," said Holmes, chuckling. "I fancy the ashes of them
might even now be found in that oven which had already consumed a part."

"But why in the world would anyone want to burn the bones of a man who
has been dead a thousand years?" asked John Mason.

"That is what we are here to find out," said Holmes. "It may mean a long
search, and we need not detain you. I fancy that we shall get our
solution before morning."

When John Mason had left us, Holmes set to work making a very careful
examination of the graves, ranging from a very ancient one, which
appeared to be Saxon, in the centre, through a long line of Norman Hugos
and Odos, until we reached the Sir William and Sir Denis Falder of the
eighteenth century. It was an hour or more before Holmes came to a
leaden coffin standing on end before the entrance to the vault. I heard
his little cry of satisfaction and was aware from his hurried but
purposeful movements that he had reached a goal. With his lens he was
eagerly examining the edges of the heavy lid. Then he drew from his
pocket a short jemmy, a box-opener, which he thrust into a chink,
levering back the whole front, which seemed to be secured by only a
couple of clamps. There was a rending, tearing sound as it gave way, but
it had hardly hinged back and partly revealed the contents before we had
an unforeseen interruption.

Someone was walking in the chapel above. It was the firm, rapid step of
one who came with a definite purpose and knew well the ground upon which
he walked. A light streamed down the stairs, and an instant later the
man who bore it was framed in the Gothic archway. He was a terrible
figure, huge in stature and fierce in manner. A large stable-lantern
which he held in front of him shone upward upon a strong, heavily
moustached face and angry eyes, which glared round him into every recess
of the vault, finally fixing themselves with a deadly stare upon my
companion and myself.

"Who the devil are you?" he thundered. "And what are you doing upon my
property?" Then, as Holmes returned no answer, he took a couple of steps
forward and raised a heavy stick which he carried. "Do you hear me?" he
cried. "Who are you? What are you doing here?" His cudgel quivered in
the air.

But instead of shrinking Holmes advanced to meet him.

"I also have a question to ask you, Sir Robert," he said in his sternest
tone. "Who is this? And what is it doing here?"

He turned and tore open the coffin-lid behind him. In the glare of the
lantern I saw a body swathed in a sheet from head to foot, with
dreadful, witch-like features, all nose and chin, projecting at one end,
the dim, glazed eyes staring from a discoloured and crumbling face.

The baronet had staggered back with a cry and supported himself against
a stone sarcophagus.

"How came you to know of this?" he cried. And then, with some return of
his truculent manner: "What business is it of yours?"

"My name is Sherlock Holmes," said my companion. "Possibly it is
familiar to you. In any case, my business is that of every other good
citizen -- to uphold the law. It seems to me that you have much to answer for."

Sir Robert glared for a moment, but Holmes's quiet voice and cool,
assured manner had their effect.

"'Fore God, Mr. Holmes, it's all right," said he. "Appearances are
against me, I'll admit, but I could act no otherwise."

"I should be happy to think so, but I fear your explanations must be
before the police."

Sir Robert shrugged his broad shoulders.

"Well, if it must be, it must. Come up to the house and you can judge
for yourself how the matter stands."

A quarter of an hour later we found ourselves in what I judge, from the
lines of polished barrels behind glass covers, to be the gun-room of the
old house. It was comfortably furnished, and here Sir Robert left us for
a few moments. When he returned he had two companions with him; the one,
the florid young woman whom we had seen in the carriage; the other, a
small rat-faced man with a disagreeably furtive manner. These two wore
an appearance of utter bewilderment, which showed that the baronet had
not yet had time to explain to them the turn events had taken.

"There," said Sir Robert with a wave of his hand, "are Mr. and Mrs.
Norlett. Mrs. Norlett, under her maiden name of Evans, has for some
years been my sister's confidential maid. I have brought them here
because I feel that my best course is to explain the true position to
you, and they are the two people upon earth who can substantiate what I
say."

"Is this necessary, Sir Robert? Have you thought what you are doing?"
cried the woman.

"As to me, I entirely disclaim all responsibility," said her husband.

Sir Robert gave him a glance of contempt. "I will take all
responsibility," said he. "Now, Mr. Holmes, listen to a plain statement
of the facts.

"You have clearly gone pretty deeply into my affairs or I should not
have found you where I did. Therefore, you know already, in all
probability, that I am running a dark horse for the Derby and that
everything depends upon my success. If I win, all is easy. If I
lose -- well, I dare not think of that!"

"I understand the position," said Holmes.

"I am dependent upon my sister, Lady Beatrice, for everything. But it is
well known that her interest in the estate is for her own life only. For
myself, I am deeply in the hands of the Jews. I have always known that
if my sister were to die my creditors would be on to my estate like a
flock of vultures. Everything would be seized -- my stables, my
horses -- everything. Well, Mr. Holmes, my sister did die just a week ago."

"And you told no one!"

"What could I do? Absolute ruin faced me. If I could stave things off
for three weeks all would be well. Her maid's husband -- this man here -- is
an actor. It came into our heads -- it came into my head -- that he could for
that short period personate my sister. It was but a case of appearing
daily in the carriage, for no one need enter her room save the maid. It
was not difficult to arrange. My sister died of the dropsy which had
long afflicted her."

"That will be for a coroner to decide."

"Her doctor would certify that for months her symptoms have threatened
such an end."

"Well, what did you do?"

"The body could not remain there. On the first night Norlett and I
carried it out to the old well-house, which is now never used. We were
followed, however, by her pet spaniel, which yapped continually at the
door, so I felt some safer place was needed. I got rid of the spaniel,
and we carried the body to the crypt of the church. There was no
indignity or irreverence, Mr. Holmes. I do not feel that I have wronged
the dead."

"Your conduct seems to me inexcusable, Sir Robert."

The baronet shook his head impatiently. "It is easy to preach," said he.
"Perhaps you would have felt differently if you had been in my position.
One cannot see all one's hopes and all one's plans shattered at the last
moment and make no effort to save them. It seemed to me that it would be
no unworthy resting-place if we put her for the time in one of the
coffins of her husband's ancestors lying in what is still consecrated
ground. We opened such a coffin, removed the contents, and placed her as
you have seen her. As to the old relics which we took out, we could not
leave them on the floor of the crypt. Norlett and I removed them, and he
descended at night and burned them in the central furnace. There is my
story, Mr. Holmes, though how you forced my hand so that I have to tell
it is more than I can say."

Holmes sat for some time lost in thought.

"There is one flaw in your narrative, Sir Robert," he said at last.
"Your bets on the race, and therefore your hopes for the future, would
hold good even if your creditors seized your estate."

"The horse would be part of the estate. What do they care for my bets?
As likely as not they would not run him at all. My chief creditor is,
unhappily, my most bitter enemy -- a rascally fellow, Sam Brewer, whom I
was once compelled to horsewhip on Newmarket Heath. Do you suppose that
he would try to save me?"

"Well, Sir Robert," said Holmes, rising, "this matter must, of course,
be referred to the police. It was my duty to bring the facts to light,
and there I must leave it. As to the morality or decency of your
conduct, it is not for me to express an opinion. It is nearly midnight,
Watson, and I think we may make our way back to our humble abode."

It is generally known now that this singular episode ended upon a
happier note than Sir Robert's actions deserved. Shoscombe Prince did
win the Derby, the sporting owner did net eighty thousand pounds in
bets, and the creditors did hold their hand until the race was over,
when they were paid in full, and enough was left to reestablish Sir
Robert in a fair position in life. Both police and coroner took a
lenient view of the transaction, and beyond a mild censure for the delay
in registering the lady's decease, the lucky owner got away scatheless
from this strange incident in a career which has now outlived its
shadows and promises to end in an honoured old age.

      The Adventure of the Retired Colourman

Sherlock Holmes was in a melancholy and philosophic mood that morning.
His alert practical nature was subject to such reactions.

"Did you see him?" he asked.

"You mean the old fellow who has just gone out?"

"Precisely."

"Yes, I met him at the door."

"What did you think of him?"

"A pathetic, futile, broken creature."

"Exactly, Watson. Pathetic and futile. But is not all life pathetic and
futile? Is not his story a microcosm of the whole? We reach. We grasp.
And what is left in our hands at the end? A shadow. Or worse than a
shadow -- misery."

"Is he one of your clients?"

"Well, I suppose I may call him so. He has been sent on by the Yard.
Just as medical men occasionally send their incurables to a quack. They
argue that they can do nothing more, and that whatever happens the
patient can be no worse than he is."

"What is the matter?"

Holmes took a rather soiled card from the table. "Josiah Amberley. He
says he was junior partner of Brickfall and Amberley, who are
manufacturers of artistic materials. You will see their names upon
paint-boxes. He made his little pile, retired from business at the age
of sixty-one, bought a house at Lewisham, and settled down to rest after
a life of ceaseless grind. One would think his future was tolerably
assured."

"Yes, indeed."

Holmes glanced over some notes which he had scribbled upon the back of
an envelope.

"Retired in 1896, Watson. Early in 1897 he married a woman twenty years
younger than himself -- a good-looking woman, too, if the photograph does
not flatter. A competence, a wife, leisure -- it seemed a straight road
which lay before him. And yet within two years he is, as you have seen,
as broken and miserable a creature as crawls beneath the sun."

"But what has happened?"

"The old story, Watson. A treacherous friend and a fickle wife. It would
appear that Amberley has one hobby in life, and it is chess. Not far
from him at Lewisham there lives a young doctor who is also a
chess-player. I have noted his name as Dr. Ray Ernest. Ernest was
frequently in the house, and an intimacy between him and Mrs. Amberley
was a natural sequence, for you must admit that our unfortunate client
has few outward graces, whatever his inner virtues may be. The couple
went off together last week -- destination untraced. What is more, the
faithless spouse carried off the old man's deed-box as her personal
luggage with a good part of his life's savings within. Can we find the
lady? Can we save the money? A commonplace problem so far as it has
developed, and yet a vital one for Josiah Amberley."

"What will you do about it?"

"Well, the immediate question, my dear Watson, happens to be, What will
you do? -- if you will be good enough to understudy me. You know that I am
preoccupied with this case of the two Coptic Patriarchs, which should
come to a head to-day. I really have not time to go out to Lewisham, and
yet evidence taken on the spot has a special value. The old fellow was
quite insistent that I should go, but I explained my difficulty. He is
prepared to meet a representative."

"By all means," I answered. "I confess I don't see that I can be of much
service, but I am willing to do my best." And so it was that on a summer
afternoon I set forth to Lewisham, little dreaming that within a week
the affair in which I was engaging would be the eager debate of all England.

It was late that evening before I returned to Baker Street and gave an
account of my mission. Holmes lay with his gaunt figure stretched in his
deep chair, his pipe curling forth slow wreaths of acrid tobacco, while
his eyelids drooped over his eyes so lazily that he might almost have
been asleep were it not that at any halt or questionable passage of my
narrative they half lifted, and two gray eyes, as bright and keen as
rapiers, transfixed me with their searching glance.

"The Haven is the name of Mr. Josiah Amberley's house," I explained. "I
think it would interest you, Holmes. It is like some penurious patrician
who has sunk into the company of his inferiors. You know that particular
quarter, the monotonous brick streets, the weary suburban highways.
Right in the middle of them, a little island of ancient culture and
comfort, lies this old home, surrounded by a high sun-baked wall mottled
with lichens and topped with moss, the sort of wall -- "

"Cut out the poetry, Watson," said Holmes severely. "I note that it was
a high brick wall."

"Exactly. I should not have known which was The Haven had I not asked a
lounger who was smoking in the street. I have a reason for mentioning
him. He was a tall, dark, heavily moustached, rather military-looking
man. He nodded in answer to my inquiry and gave me a curiously
questioning glance, which came back to my memory a little later.

"I had hardly entered the gateway before I saw Mr. Amberley coming down
the drive. I only had a glimpse of him this morning, and he certainly
gave me the impression of a strange creature, but when I saw him in full
light his appearance was even more abnormal."

"I have, of course, studied it, and yet I should be interested to have
your impression," said Holmes.

"He seemed to me like a man who was literally bowed down by care. His
back was curved as though he carried a heavy burden. Yet he was not the
weakling that I had at first imagined, for his shoulders and chest have
the framework of a giant, though his figure tapers away into a pair of
spindled legs."

"Left shoe wrinkled, right one smooth."

"I did not observe that."

"No, you wouldn't. I spotted his artificial limb. But proceed."

"I was struck by the snaky locks of grizzled hair which curled from
under his old straw hat, and his face with its fierce, eager expression
and the deeply lined features."

"Very good, Watson. What did he say?"

"He began pouring out the story of his grievances. We walked down the
drive together, and of course I took a good look round. I have never
seen a worse-kept place. The garden was all running to seed, giving me
an impression of wild neglect in which the plants had been allowed to
find the way of Nature rather than of art. How any decent woman could
have tolerated such a state of things, I don't know. The house, too, was
slatternly to the last degree, but the poor man seemed himself to be
aware of it and to be trying to remedy it, for a great pot of green
paint stood in the centre of the hall, and he was carrying a thick brush
in his left hand. He had been working on the woodwork.

"He took me into his dingy sanctum, and we had a long chat. Of course,
he was disappointed that you had not come yourself. 'I hardly expected,'
he said, 'that so humble an individual as myself, especially after my
heavy financial loss, could obtain the complete attention of so famous a
man as Mr. Sherlock Holmes.'

"I assured him that the financial question did not arise. 'No, of
course, it is art for art's sake with him,' said he, 'but even on the
artistic side of crime he might have found something here to study. And
human nature, Dr. Watson -- the black ingratitude of it all! When did I
ever refuse one of her requests? Was ever a woman so pampered? And that
young man -- he might have been my own son. He had the run of my house. And
yet see how they have treated me! Oh, Dr. Watson, it is a dreadful,
dreadful world!'

"That was the burden of his song for an hour or more. He had, it seems,
no suspicion of an intrigue. They lived alone save for a woman who comes
in by the day and leaves every evening at six. On that particular
evening old Amberley, wishing to give his wife a treat, had taken two
upper circle seats at the Haymarket Theatre. At the last moment she had
complained of a headache and had refused to go. He had gone alone. There
seemed to be no doubt about the fact, for he produced the unused ticket
which he had taken for his wife."

"That is remarkable -- most remarkable," said Holmes, whose interest in the
case seemed to be rising. "Pray continue, Watson. I find your narrative
most arresting. Did you personally examine this ticket? You did not,
perchance, take the number?"

"It so happens that I did," I answered with some pride. "It chanced to
be my old school number, thirty-one, and so is stuck in my head."

"Excellent, Watson! His seat, then, was either thirty or thirty-two."

"Quite so," I answered with some mystification. "And on B row."

"That is most satisfactory. What else did he tell you?"

"He showed me his strong-room, as he called it. It really is a
strong-room -- like a bank -- with iron door and shutter -- burglar-proof, as he
claimed. However, the woman seems to have had a duplicate key, and
between them they had carried off some seven thousand pounds' worth of
cash and securities."

"Securities! How could they dispose of those?"

"He said that he had given the police a list and that he hoped they
would be unsaleable. He had got back from the theatre about midnight and
found the place plundered, the door and window open, and the fugitives
gone. There was no letter or message, nor has he heard a word since. He
at once gave the alarm to the police."

Holmes brooded for some minutes.

"You say he was painting. What was he painting?"

"Well, he was painting the passage. But he had already painted the door
and woodwork of this room I spoke of."

"Does it not strike you as a strange occupation in the circumstances?"

"'One must do something to ease an aching heart.' That was his own
explanation. It was eccentric, no doubt, but he is clearly an eccentric
man. He tore up one of his wife's photographs in my presence -- tore it up
furiously in a tempest of passion. 'I never wish to see her damned face
again,' he shrieked."

"Anything more, Watson?"

"Yes, one thing which struck me more than anything else. I had driven to
the Blackheath Station and had caught my train there when, just as it
was starting, I saw a man dart into the carriage next to my own. You
know that I have a quick eye for faces, Holmes. It was undoubtedly the
tall, dark man whom I had addressed in the street. I saw him once more
at London Bridge, and then I lost him in the crowd. But I am convinced
that he was following me."

"No doubt! No doubt!" said Holmes. "A tall, dark, heavily moustached
man, you say, with gray-tinted sun-glasses?"

"Holmes, you are a wizard. I did not say so, but he had gray-tinted
sun-glasses."

"And a Masonic tie-pin?"

"Holmes!"

"Quite simple, my dear Watson. But let us get down to what is practical.
I must admit to you that the case, which seemed to me to be so absurdly
simple as to be hardly worth my notice, is rapidly assuming a very
different aspect. It is true that though in your mission you have missed
everything of importance, yet even those things which have obtruded
themselves upon your notice give rise to serious thought."

"What have I missed?"

"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow. You know that I am quite impersonal. No
one else would have done better. Some possibly not so well. But clearly
you have missed some vital points. What is the opinion of the neighbours
about this man Amberley and his wife? That surely is of importance. What
of Dr. Ernest? Was he the gay Lothario one would expect? With your
natural advantages, Watson, every lady is your helper and accomplice.
What about the girl at the post-office, or the wife of the greengrocer?
I can picture you whispering soft nothings with the young lady at the
Blue Anchor, and receiving hard somethings in exchange. All this you
have left undone."

"It can still be done."

"It has been done. Thanks to the telephone and the help of the Yard, I
can usually get my essentials without leaving this room. As a matter of
fact, my information confirms the man's story. He has the local repute
of being a miser as well as a harsh and exacting husband. That he had a
large sum of money in that strong-room of his is certain. So also is it
that young Dr. Ernest, an unmarried man, played chess with Amberley, and
probably played the fool with his wife. All this seems plain sailing,
and one would think that there was no more to be said -- and yet! -- and yet!"

"Where lies the difficulty?"

"In my imagination, perhaps. Well, leave it there, Watson. Let us escape
from this weary workaday world by the side door of music. Carina sings
to-night at the Albert Hall, and we still have time to dress, dine, and
enjoy."

In the morning I was up betimes, but some toast crumbs and two empty
egg-shells told me that my companion was earlier still. I found a
scribbled note upon the table.

Dear Watson:
There are one or two points of contact which I should wish to establish
with Mr. Josiah Amberley. When I have done so we can dismiss the case -- or
not. I would only ask you to be on hand about three o'clock, as I
conceive it possible that I may want you.
S. H.

I saw nothing of Holmes all day, but at the hour named he returned,
grave, preoccupied, and aloof. At such times it was wiser to leave him
to himself.

"Has Amberley been here yet?"

"No."

"Ah! I am expecting him."

He was not disappointed, for presently the old fellow arrived with a
very worried and puzzled expression upon his austere face.

"I've had a telegram, Mr. Holmes. I can make nothing of it." He handed
it over, and Holmes read it aloud.

"Come at once without fail. Can give you information as to your recent loss.
"Elman.
"The Vicarage.

"Dispatched at 2.10 from Little Purlington," said Holmes. "Little
Purlington is in Essex, I believe, not far from Frinton. Well, of course
you will start at once. This is evidently from a responsible person, the
vicar of the place. Where is my Crockford? Yes, here we have him: 'J. C.
Elman, M. A., Living of Moosmoor cum Little Purlington.' Look up the
trains, Watson."

"There is one at 5.20 from Liverpool Street."

"Excellent. You had best go with him, Watson. He may need help or
advice. Clearly we have come to a crisis in this affair."

But our client seemed by no means eager to start.

"It's perfectly absurd, Mr. Holmes," he said. "What can this man
possibly know of what has occurred? It is waste of time and money."

"He would not have telegraphed to you if he did not know something. Wire
at once that you are coming."

"I don't think I shall go."

Holmes assumed his sternest aspect.

"It would make the worst possible impression both on the police and upon
myself, Mr. Amberley, if when so obvious a clue arose you should refuse
to follow it up. We should feel that you were not really in earnest in
this investigation."

Our client seemed horrified at the suggestion.

"Why, of course I shall go if you look at it in that way," said he. "On
the face of it, it seems absurd to suppose that this person knows
anything, but if you think -- "

"I do think," said Holmes with emphasis, and so we were launched upon
our journey. Holmes took me aside before we left the room and gave me
one word of counsel, which showed that he considered the matter to be of
importance. "Whatever you do, see that he really does go," said he.
"Should he break away or return, get to the nearest telephone exchange
and send the single word 'Bolted.' I will arrange here that it shall
reach me wherever I am."

Little Purlington is not an easy place to reach, for it is on a branch
line. My remembrance of the journey is not a pleasant one, for the
weather was hot, the train slow, and my companion sullen and silent,
hardly talking at all save to make an occasional sardonic remark as to
the futility of our proceedings. When we at last reached the little
station it was a two-mile drive before we came to the Vicarage, where a
big, solemn, rather pompous clergyman received us in his study. Our
telegram lay before him.

"Well, gentlemen," he asked, "what can I do for you?"

"We came," I explained, "in answer to your wire."

"My wire! I sent no wire."

"I mean the wire which you sent to Mr. Josiah Amberley about his wife
and his money."

"If this is a joke, sir, it is a very questionable one," said the vicar
angrily. "I have never heard of the gentleman you name, and I have not
sent a wire to anyone."

Our client and I looked at each other in amazement.

"Perhaps there is some mistake," said I; "are there perhaps two
vicarages? Here is the wire itself, signed Elman and dated from the
Vicarage."

"There is only one vicarage, sir, and only one vicar, and this wire is a
scandalous forgery, the origin of which shall certainly be investigated
by the police. Meanwhile, I can see no possible object in prolonging
this interview."

So Mr. Amberley and I found ourselves on the roadside in what seemed to
me to be the most primitive village in England. We made for the
telegraph office, but it was already closed. There was a telephone,
however, at the little Railway Arms, and by it I got into touch with
Holmes, who shared in our amazement at the result of our journey.

"Most singular!" said the distant voice. "Most remarkable! I much fear,
my dear Watson, that there is no return train to-night. I have
unwittingly condemned you to the horrors of a country inn. However,
there is always Nature, Watson -- Nature and Josiah Amberley -- you can be in
close commune with both." I heard his dry chuckle as he turned away.

It was soon apparent to me that my companion's reputation as a miser was
not undeserved. He had grumbled at the expense of the journey, had
insisted upon travelling third-class, and was now clamorous in his
objections to the hotel bill. Next morning, when we did at last arrive
in London, it was hard to say which of us was in the worse humour.

"You had best take Baker Street as we pass," said I. "Mr. Holmes may
have some fresh instructions."

"If they are not worth more than the last ones they are not of much use,
" said Amberley with a malevolent scowl. None the less, he kept me
company. I had already warned Holmes by telegram of the hour of our
arrival, but we found a message waiting that he was at Lewisham and
would expect us there. That was a surprise, but an even greater one was
to find that he was not alone in the sitting-room of our client. A
stern-looking, impassive man sat beside him, a dark man with gray-tinted
glasses and a large Masonic pin projecting from his tie.

"This is my friend Mr. Barker," said Holmes. "He has been interesting
himself also in your business, Mr. Josiah Amberley, though we have been
working independently. But we both have the same question to ask you!"

Mr. Amberley sat down heavily. He sensed impending danger. I read it in
his straining eyes and his twitching features.

"What is the question, Mr. Holmes?"

"Only this: What did you do with the bodies?"

The man sprang to his feet with a hoarse scream. He clawed into the air
with his bony hands. His mouth was open, and for the instant he looked
like some horrible bird of prey. In a flash we got a glimpse of the real
Josiah Amberley, a misshapen demon with a soul as distorted as his body.
As he fell back into his chair he clapped his hand to his lips as if to
stifle a cough. Holmes sprang at his throat like a tiger and twisted his
face towards the ground. A white pellet fell from between his gasping lips.

"No short cuts, Josiah Amberley. Things must be done decently and in
order. What about it, Barker?"

"I have a cab at the door," said our taciturn companion.

"It is only a few hundred yards to the station. We will go together. You
can stay here, Watson. I shall be back within half an hour."

The old colourman had the strength of a lion in that great trunk of his,
but he was helpless in the hands of the two experienced man-handlers.
Wriggling and twisting he was dragged to the waiting cab, and I was left
to my solitary vigil in the ill-omened house. In less time than he had
named, however, Holmes was back, in company with a smart young police
inspector.

"I've left Barker to look after the formalities," said Holmes. "You had
not met Barker, Watson. He is my hated rival upon the Surrey shore. When
you said a tall dark man it was not difficult for me to complete the
picture. He has several good cases to his credit, has he not, Inspector?"

"He has certainly interfered several times," the inspector answered with
reserve.

"His methods are irregular, no doubt, like my own. The irregulars are
useful sometimes, you know. You, for example, with your compulsory
warning about whatever he said being used against him, could never have
bluffed this rascal into what is virtually a confession."

"Perhaps not. But we get there all the same, Mr. Holmes. Don't imagine
that we had not formed our own views of this case, and that we would not
have laid our hands on our man. You will excuse us for feeling sore when
you jump in with methods which we cannot use, and so rob us of the credit."

"There shall be no such robbery, MacKinnon. I assure you that I efface
myself from now onward, and as to Barker, he has done nothing save what
I told him."

The inspector seemed considerably relieved.

"That is very handsome of you, Mr. Holmes. Praise or blame can matter
little to you, but it is very different to us when the newspapers begin
to ask questions."

"Quite so. But they are pretty sure to ask questions anyhow, so it would
be as well to have answers. What will you say, for example, when the
intelligent and enterprising reporter asks you what the exact points
were which aroused your suspicion, and finally gave you a certain
conviction as to the real facts?"

The inspector looked puzzled.

"We don't seem to have got any real facts yet, Mr. Holmes. You say that
the prisoner, in the presence of three witnesses, practically confessed
by trying to commit suicide, that he had murdered his wife and her
lover. What other facts have you?"

"Have you arranged for a search?"

"There are three constables on their way."

"Then you will soon get the clearest fact of all. The bodies cannot be
far away. Try the cellars and the garden. It should not take long to dig
up the likely places. This house is older than the water-pipes. There
must be a disused well somewhere. Try your luck there."

"But how did you know of it, and how was it done?"

"I'll show you first how it was done, and then I will give the
explanation which is due to you, and even more to my long-suffering
friend here, who has been invaluable throughout. But, first, I would
give you an insight into this man's mentality. It is a very unusual
one -- so much so that I think his destination is more likely to be
Broadmoor than the scaffold. He has, to a high degree, the sort of mind
which one associates with the mediaeval Italian nature rather than with
the modern Briton. He was a miserable miser who made his wife so
wretched by his niggardly ways that she was a ready prey for any
adventurer. Such a one came upon the scene in the person of this
chess-playing doctor. Amberley excelled at chess -- one mark, Watson, of a
scheming mind. Like all misers, he was a jealous man, and his jealousy
became a frantic mania. Rightly or wrongly, he suspected an intrigue. He
determined to have his revenge, and he planned it with diabolical
cleverness. Come here!"

Holmes led us along the passage with as much certainty as if he had
lived in the house and halted at the open door of the strong-room.

"Pooh! What an awful smell of paint!" cried the inspector.

"That was our first clue," said Holmes. "You can thank Dr. Watson's
observation for that, though he failed to draw the inference. It set my
foot upon the trail. Why should this man at such a time be filling his
house with strong odours? Obviously, to cover some other smell which he
wished to conceal -- some guilty smell which would suggest suspicions. Then
came the idea of a room such as you see here with iron door and
shutter -- a hermetically sealed room. Put those two facts together, and
whither do they lead? I could only determine that by examining the house
myself. I was already certain that the case was serious, for I had
examined the box-office chart at the Haymarket Theatre -- another of Dr.
Watson's bull's-eyes -- and ascertained that neither B thirty nor
thirty-two of the upper circle had been occupied that night. Therefore,
Amberley had not been to the theatre, and his alibi fell to the ground.
He made a bad slip when he allowed my astute friend to notice the number
of the seat taken for his wife. The question now arose how I might be
able to examine the house. I sent an agent to the most impossible
village I could think of, and summoned my man to it at such an hour that
he could not possibly get back. To prevent any miscarriage, Dr. Watson
accompanied him. The good vicar's name I took, of course, out of my
Crockford. Do I make it all clear to you?"

"It is masterly," said the inspector in an awed voice.

"There being no fear of interruption I proceeded to burgle the house.
Burglary has always been an alternative profession had I cared to adopt
it, and I have little doubt that I should have come to the front.
Observe what I found. You see the gas-pipe along the skirting here. Very
good. It rises in the angle of the wall, and there is a tap here in the
corner. The pipe runs out into the strong-room, as you can see, and ends
in that plaster rose in the centre of the ceiling, where it is concealed
by the ornamentation. That end is wide open. At any moment by turning
the outside tap the room could be flooded with gas. With door and
shutter closed and the tap full on I would not give two minutes of
conscious sensation to anyone shut up in that little chamber. By what
devilish device he decoyed them there I do not know, but once inside the
door they were at his mercy."

The inspector examined the pipe with interest. "One of our officers
mentioned the smell of gas," said he, "but of course the window and door
were open then, and the paint -- or some of it -- was already about. He had
begun the work of painting the day before, according to his story. But
what next, Mr. Holmes?"

"Well, then came an incident which was rather unexpected to myself. I
was slipping through the pantry window in the early dawn when I felt a
hand inside my collar, and a voice said: 'Now, you rascal, what are you
doing in there?' When I could twist my head round I looked into the
tinted spectacles of my friend and rival, Mr. Barker. It was a curious
foregathering and set us both smiling. It seems that he had been engaged
by Dr. Ray Ernest's family to make some investigations and had come to
the same conclusion as to foul play. He had watched the house for some
days and had spotted Dr. Watson as one of the obviously suspicious
characters who had called there. He could hardly arrest Watson, but when
he saw a man actually climbing out of the pantry window there came a
limit to his restraint. Of course, I told him how matters stood and we
continued the case together."

"Why him? Why not us?"

"Because it was in my mind to put that little test which answered so
admirably. I fear you would not have gone so far."

The inspector smiled.

"Well, maybe not. I understand that I have your word, Mr. Holmes, that
you step right out of the case now and that you turn all your results
over to us."

"Certainly, that is always my custom."

"Well, in the name of the force I thank you. It seems a clear case, as
you put it, and there can't be much difficulty over the bodies."

"I'll show you a grim little bit of evidence," said Holmes, "and I am
sure Amberley himself never observed it. You'll get results, Inspector,
by always putting yourself in the other fellow's place, and thinking
what you would do yourself. It takes some imagination, but it pays. Now,
we will suppose that you were shut up in this little room, had not two
minutes to live, but wanted to get even with the fiend who was probably
mocking at you from the other side of the door. What would you do?"

"Write a message."

"Exactly. You would like to tell people how you died. No use writing on
paper. That would be seen. If you wrote on the wall someone might rest
upon it. Now, look here! Just above the skirting is scribbled with a
purple indelible pencil: 'We we -- ' That's all."

"What do you make of that?"

"Well, it's only a foot above the ground. The poor devil was on the
floor dying when he wrote it. He lost his senses before he could finish."

"He was writing, 'We were murdered.'"

"That's how I read it. If you find an indelible pencil on the body -- "

"We'll look out for it, you may be sure. But those securities? Clearly
there was no robbery at all. And yet he did possess those bonds. We
verified that."

"You may be sure he has them hidden in a safe place. When the whole
elopement had passed into history, he would suddenly discover them and
announce that the guilty couple had relented and sent back the plunder
or had dropped it on the way."

"You certainly seem to have met every difficulty," said the inspector.
"Of course, he was bound to call us in, but why he should have gone to
you I can't understand."

"Pure swank!" Holmes answered. "He felt so clever and so sure of himself
that he imagined no one could touch him. He could say to any suspicious
neighbour, 'Look at the steps I have taken. I have consulted not only
the police but even Sherlock Holmes.'"

The inspector laughed.

"We must forgive you your 'even,' Mr. Holmes," said he, "it's as
workmanlike a job as I can remember."

A couple of days later my friend tossed across to me a copy of the
bi-weekly North Surrey Observer. Under a series of flaming headlines,
which began with "The Haven Horror" and ended with "Brilliant Police
Investigation," there was a packed column of print which gave the first
consecutive account of the affair. The concluding paragraph is typical
of the whole. It ran thus:

The remarkable acumen by which Inspector MacKinnon deduced from the
smell of paint that some other smell, that of gas, for example, might be
concealed; the bold deduction that the strong-room might also be the
death-chamber, and the subsequent inquiry which led to the discovery of
the bodies in a disused well, cleverly concealed by a dog-kennel, should
live in the history of crime as a standing example of the intelligence
of our professional detectives.

"Well, well, MacKinnon is a good fellow," said Holmes with a tolerant
smile. "You can file it in our archives, Watson. Some day the true story
may be told."

